## 

Technology, Sales, and Marketing-An interview with Abhinav Mittoo

, Country Head, Uber for Business, India

-Samruddhi Pataskar

Abhinav Mittoo has a career spanning a decade in sales. He has previously served as the Director of Sales for American Express in India. He is currently the Country Head for ‘Uber for Business’ leading the expansion for the Enterprise Business of Uber India. Samruddhi from IIT Technology Ambit had a nice time picking his brain about the confluence of sales and technology. The following interview delineates his experiences and perspectives.

Q: What were the major technologies that you encountered in your role at Uber?

A: When it comes to Uber, let me talk about safety and the role technology plays in it. It is important to collect data points first. We can actually reach a driver’s phone and know how he’s driving because of the Uber technology. We can know if he’s driving fast or slow, accelerometers tell whether he’s braking hard, etc. We measure customer feedback and what makes a customer feel unsafe. We figure out what the problem is: Has the general perspective of safety gone wrong? Or is it really the aspect of driving that customers are talking about? Secondly, we make it more reliable. If you click the SOS button available during the ride if you feel unsafe, Uber can take action accordingly. The notification goes to the police station and the Uber contact center, getting you immediate help. The law enforcement agency intervenes if required. Drivers have no access to mass data so they do not know the address of the place where the customer was dropped off, which is especially good in the case of female riders. 

Let me take a discursive course from the proposed question here. Prevention is better than cure. We are also working to create awareness about why drivers should not act a certain way and what impact it has. We’re training drivers: we have a diverse country where people aren’t culturally exposed to how they should treat women or what women may consider unsafe. We are investing in institutions that conduct these classes for us to make drivers aware of how they should behave, give examples of what they might do that can come across as threatening to the female passengers, etc. The next thing is to measure the impact of the training. We haven’t seen many cases come up. We’re creating a market equilibrium and also suspending riders now if we repeatedly get negative feedback of them from drivers, just the way action can be taken against drivers.

Q: Can you mention some problems that are still not solved by technology but have a good scope for working on?

A: When you solve a problem, there are new problems that come up and that’s how the world functions. Tech will always solve something but will give birth to more problems to mull over, which is, in fact, something productive for humankind. Sometimes new subproblems are about timing, cost, the requirement at the moment, etc. 

Take digital wallets for example. Customers may start losing value on their money because it’s not in a bank bringing returns but stagnant in a digital wallet. This is one new problem that can be studied and solved!

Q: You have worked at ITC and American Express as well before joining Uber. Can you tell us about the technology used in Sales over there?

A: Sales are functions of mathematics, not great determination, grit or perseverance. Those are the things that you need to perform, not how to perform. When I started working at ITC, we would use Excel sheets to perform calculations about complex scenarios and to obtain an analysis of complex data. Data crunching and filling in information was done manually on Excel sheets, which made it prone to errors and which can consequently cause data to be stolen. It was not scalable or reliable. It did not integrate into the product or talk of its payment modes. All this led to the development of CRM tools, which encapsulated everything we needed but could not find in Excel sheets. We could now measure sales velocity, the impact of sales we require etc. CRM replaced Excel sheets. The best CRM available is[salesforce.com](http://salesforce.com). An understanding of salesforce is now a requirement for a sales job. To be a leader, you have to know how to use it, make decisions, draw analysis to put you in the right direction of what the market needs and so on. Considering input and output, CRM has come a long way. 

I was introduced to another tech advancement at American Express. It uses a closed loop network that drives all credit transactions. The sort of value a closed network can build for consumers or stakeholders over open networks is phenomenal. An idea perceived many years ago is still relevant and path-breaking because it was thought of with the future in mind.

Q: You have work experience in the Asia-Pacific region as well. How do you think the sales scenario in India differs from that in other countries?

A:  Your product must be scalable and represent a lot of opportunities for other markets as well as your own internal system. Also, core values must stay intact. The way a product is perceived should have pretty much a similar construct. For example, language needs to change in different markets. These are basic things for products to work in other markets: accessibility, pricing, segmentation available in that market, etc. India has many more companies than rest of Asia Pacific. Every country has a different people culture and how people buy products, i.e., what they buy for, what they do with the product and so on. In India, a lot of people have a trust deficit. They want products that micromanage and intervene at every level. Elsewhere, a general sense of awareness and responsibility exists among everyone to take care of things made available to them. It’s about civic sense. In a broader aspect, negotiation pricing. Products sold in India for a premium are generally tried to be monetized by people. Customers should focus on value rather than price because the value will ultimately bring them better returns on investment than a cheaper product, which may not even work. In the USA, companies like to have open policy programs, they like to offer things and their employees make choices. In India, those choices are controlled, examined, decided why they’re being made and judged whether they should be made or not. That completely changes the scenario.

Q: With a career spanning a decade in sales, what do you think is the single most important strategy in marketing a product?

A: The first step is to understand where your product stands among other benchmarked products. You need to understand the aspirations of the customers and what gaps your product might be able to fill, such as what market segment you wish to sell your product to and what price. The next part is the means of doing so. Advertisements may target the emotions, feelings, thoughts of customers but it also needs to be made crystal clear whether the product is a one-time-buy on an occasion or repeatable. If it falls under the latter category, the mechanism to market it works on trust. For example, the insurance industry works on fear and immediate buying. It targets not the people who will die but their families. The families act on the fear of the future and what loopholes will have to be filled when the loved one exit, how they would replace the dependability they had on the loved one and so on. 

Another phenomenon is impulsive buying. Mobile apps are the best example. We barely use 9 of the 10 apps on our smartphones. If you still have a subscription to them, it is a scam. How do they land up in our phones then in the first place? Swanky ads are pushed through a self-serve channel like social media because your data is tracked. Convincing short videos or animated clips are generated that make the customer click the app. That’s the first job of the ad that is served. Next is the GUI of the app. The customer may see a five-star rating but most users don’t take the effort to check other ratings. Usually, five-star ratings are at the top. Your product needs to solve what is required and what the system allows for. 

Q: Excessively advertising your product can have a reverse impact on the consumer. What is the threshold where one needs to stop marketing his/her product?

A: That’s a very good question. There is a lot of competition in the market. Low-quality products with very good marketing also do quite well. Let’s take cosmetics as an example. The market has both branded cosmetics and local cosmetics. Branded products are expensive and justify their prices by claiming the very high quality of their products but there is no real way to test their quality. It won’t give a bad result very quickly. It’s all about how it smells, feels, what feedback you receive on it, etc. Even low-end cosmetic brands end up competing with premium brands because of good marketing. They are efficient in maintaining their customer segment who are paying their price and buying the product. It also gives u enough cash to afford a better marketing planning in the future. 

Good marketing begins with research. This is an important starting point of many major league companies. There is research carried out on how to make a product look better, what emotional values of the customer that needs to be met and of course, how to market it. You need to realize what gap you have to fill to reach a certain output. The power of this is seen in ads. A metric I usually use to gauge this is from how the ad made me feel at the first instant and how it made me feel when I revisited it. Did it make me feel different or the same? There is a specific model in marketing addressing challenges. We all want aesthetically pleasing products to replace our old, bulky, cumbersome ones. As far as the tech info is concerned, there is only so much you can do about tech. For example, geysers require filaments and maybe a regulator at the most to control temperature. That’s as simple as it gets. You may talk about add-on features demanding excessive expenditure on R&D such as being able to switch the geyser on from your office itself etc but they are not really required. Nor are they at the heart of the problem or the crux of the product in consideration. In a country like ours with an acute shortage of drinking water and a real, existential problem of the lack of quality potable water, geysers would definitely sell very well. If I replace my old geyser with a new one from a different brand and don’t even remember what the brand of the previous one was, it is a red flag that goes to show that it has lost its marketing touch. Marketing is not a one-time task but a continual process.