**UrbanClap: Service at a Clap!**

**UrbanClap is a mobile marketplace for on-demand local and home-based services in up to 97 different categories including beauty services, photographers, electricians, home cleaning and repairs, yoga and guitar instructors etc. The hyperlocal startup boasts of operations in over 16 cities- including Delhi-NCR, Hyderabad, Pune, Bengaluru, Mumbai, Chennai etc and over 3 million customers and 100k experts.**

With its operations in over 16 cities- including Delhi-NCR, Hyderabad, Pune, Bengaluru, Mumbai, Chennai etc- over 3 million customers and 100k experts, hyperlocal startup UrbanClap is now heading towards profitability. Co-founder and CEO Abhiraj Bhal firmly state that an IPO is right around the corner.

November 10, 2014. UrbanClap was born when Varun Khaitan and Abhiraj Bhal, batchmates from IIT Kanpur, decided to leave their illustrious jobs back at The Boston Consulting Group when they found their third musketeer Raghav Chandra who was then an engineer at Twitter and shared their ambitions of creating a large tech business solving a primary customer need. UrbanClap is a mobile marketplace for on-demand local and home-based services in up to 97 different categories including beauty services, photographers, electricians, home cleaning and repairs, yoga and guitar instructors etc.

Realizing that the local services industry, an irreplaceable part of our day to day life, was extremely fragmented, the trio decided to find a solution that is strongly backed by technological innovation to permanently relieve the numerous phone call lists that offered some respite till then. Other startups operating in the same segment were Doormint, TimeSaverz, Mr. Right, Taskbob and Zepper and listing portals such as JustDial, Sulekha, YellowPages, Near.in. The initial days were spent in experimentation to decide the perfect business model and expanding the team that would execute it. The services they provided were broadly divided into two categories, first, a full-stack model for home services with UrbanClap directly responsible for the service delivery and second, an AI-driven customization model for hiring professional services. Apart from hiring a highly skilled set of VP&#39;s early on, they were lucky to find enough capital from VC&#39;s like SAIF Partners, Accel Partners, and Bessemer Venture Partners. Through Series A and Series B rounds, they raised $35Mn in a year which would fuel them for a few years. At the end of 2015, they had succeeded in amassing over 2500 service requests and 10000 service professionals. However, with over 300 companies competing in the same market, they expected intense competition in 2016, the year of the Hyperlocal Bubble.

With the rise in the use of smartphones, the internet and the confidence of investors a number of businesses sprung up in 2015 to tend to the niche market of instant delivery of services. This facilitated the rise of the Hyperlocal Bubble in 2016. According to Inc42, H1 2015 to H2 2015 observed a phenomenal jump of almost 500% in Total Deal Value and 50% increment in Number of Deals. However, merging the online and offline platforms in order to scale the demand and deliver in the shortest time proved to be a daunting task for many. Lack of clear business models and too many similar apps meant that the investors lost confidence by the end of 2015 and in 2016, the number of hyperlocal startups founded dropped by 93%. Major players like Flipkart&#39;s delivery division- Nearby and Ola Cafe lost in the Hyperlocal Shutdown Curse!

For UrbanClap however, the story was different. Having sorted out the product-market fit and liquidity, they began working on customer experience and monetization in 2016. Boasting of less than 15% acceptance rates for service professionals, they were incredibly focused on quality of experience for both the service partners and the users. Abhiraj Bhal is confident that sticking to the ideology that quality needs more focus than quantity was what helped them cement their place in the internet space.

The name UrbanClap was deliberately chosen over a brand name that directly connects with what the company does to foster organic growth of the brand. Urban – because all their services are targeted towards the Urban user, and Clap – to signify bringing their service professionals and customers together. Also, Clap signifies the ease with which one can hire a service professional on UrbanClap – as simple as a clap. This worked meticulously as they gained popularity among service providers to the point that they had to have a clean-up drive to focus on the long-term marketplace health. Clean-up drives are now conducted on a regular basis every quarter.

They further invested resources in expanding categories to promote regular and repeat users, a decision that also helped improve their customer ratings. Through integration with Snapdeal in April 2016, UrbanClap expanded their customer base further while paying a certain commission for the bookings made through their app.

2017 was the year for the user and supplier growth. Supplier growth could only be achieved by time and hard work, and the company looked at innovative strategies like Search Engine Optimisation, Whatsapp and Facebook marketing and paid marketing through ads to tackle user growth. In July 2017, the company received Series C funding of $21M by Vy Capital. With this UrbanClap is now keenly focusing on solidifying a sustainable competitive strategy in their march towards an IPO. In the process, they are eyeing a minimum commissioned revenue of $200Mn - $300Mn as a threshold and building a deeper, 5-level integration with suppliers and service professionals.

The entry of big companies like Google with Areo, Big Basket, Paytm Mall, Grofers, UberEATS and Amazon Pantry in the hyperlocal space, UrbanClap is now eyeing profitability. Series D funding of $50Mn raised on November 30th, 2018 from Steadview Capital will help them boost platform adoption by different entities, invest in technology and training and expand into tier 2 cities and into international territories. The mission is now to transform 1 million service professionals into micro-entrepreneurs in India and other emerging markets.
