**Sundar Pichai: Ideology on Technology and Google**

**A classic tale of a hardworking intelligent Indian and not quite as enthralling as the one of dropping out of college and then taking subversive jabs at the conformist education system. Think Again.**<br/><br/>Sundar Pichai, the number one guy - the Chief Executive Officer of Google, hails from Chennai, India with a Bachelor&#39;s degree from the prestigious engineering college of the country- Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur. He further excelled at academics in KGP and continued his stint in Stanford for an MS in Material Science and then at University of Pennsylvania&#39;s Wharton School for his MBA and graduated as a Palmer and a Siebel Scholar. After stretches at Applied Materials and McKinsey, he joined Google in 2004 as a Product Manager and subsequently went on to the Throne in 2015.<br/><br/>This seems quite like a classic tale of a hardworking intelligent Indian, doesn&#39;t it? Maybe not quite as enthralling as the tale of dropping out of college and then taking subversive jabs at the conformist education system.<br/><br/>Well, in the end, how exciting the tale actually is, is upto you to decide. We&#39;ve tried to stitch through a lot of sources to bring his tale to you. Here is an account of his journey, describing his ideology on technology, and the challenges he encounters while helming the mammoth tech company- Google.<br/><br/>## Growing Up in Chennai and Making It to IIT KGP<br/><br/>Growing up, Sundar Pichai describes his life to be simple, which was pleasant in contrast to the present world. Lived in a modest house, shared with other occupants. He describes: &quot;Other houses had refrigerators and then we finally got one. It was a big deal&quot;.<br/><br/>A voracious reader since his childhood (aren&#39;t all CEO&#39;s voracious readers?!), Pichai enjoyed reading whatever he could get his hands upon. He vividly recalls enjoying the books by Charles Dickens and playing street cricket with friends. Eventually, Pichai persevered to get selected in the premier Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur and pursued his bachelors in Metallurgy &amp; Materials engineering. On 5th January 2017, the institute witnessed the homecoming of one of its most glorious alumni, Sundar Pichai. An inspiration to every KGPian who wants to stir the world through technology and lead not just a company but the entire world!<br/><br/>## Journey at Stanford and the Move to Google<br/><br/>Sundar Pichai arrived in California and it was the first time he had boarded a plane! Fascinated about Silicon Valley at once, Pichai fondly wanted to be in the Valley where everything happened. Things were quite different here from India. Back in IIT, Pichai seldomly accessed computers- as less as 3 to 4 times in his entire time there and here it was difficult to contain his ecstasy after seeing these big labs where one could program for unrestricted hours.<br/><br/>When Pichai first joined Google, 14 years back, he recalls: **&quot;I was struck by the fact that it was a very idealistic, optimistic place&quot;**. Google still continues to hold the prominent streak of idealism and Pichai believes that there is more realism about how hard some things are in the world.<br/><br/>**&quot;Technology doesn&#39;t solve humanity&#39;s problems. It was always naïve of me to think so&quot;** , emphasising that technology is an empowering influence still mankind needs to learn to solve its own issues and a realistic approach towards these issues safeguards us from our over-reliance on technology.<br/><br/>## Personal Approach to Technology and Family<br/><br/>After returning home on a Friday evening, Sundar Pichai truly wishes to relinquish his gadgets, but he hasn&#39;t been quite successful in achieving that. Pichai strives at spending quality time with family, attentive to what his children learn from his actions and routine.<br/><br/>_&quot;My son is 11 years old, and he is mining Ethereum and earning money. He&#39;s getting some insight into how the world works, how commerce works&quot;_ and his son doesn&#39;t have a phone, adds Pichai. He believes that every generation is stressed over the new innovations and feels that this time it&#39;s extraordinary and agrees that the change that is going on is a lot quicker than at any other time in human history.<br/><br/>## On Learning Digital Skills and Empowering the Workforce<br/><br/>When considering to enable the workforce to flourish and discover openings in the advanced world, the main concept which comes in the limelight is &quot;coding&quot;. Sundar Pichai believes that coding, obviously, is a fundamental and a core skill where America invests. Google has time and again catered resources to people from diversified backgrounds, helping them to code and procure expertise in programming and artificial intelligence. Sundar shares: _&quot;All of this will help meet the growing need for workers who can write the software that will power everyone&#39;s businesses&quot;_, fostering numerous individuals to move into high paying careers.<br/><br/>The focus on coding has left a conceivably bigger opportunity unexplored. Previously, people learned job skills and occupational abilities which were sufficient for a lifetime. Sundar Pichai tells: _&quot;Nowadays, workers are expected to have digital skills which did not exist five years ago&quot;_. A report by Brookings Institute states that the US requiring &quot;medium-digital&quot; skills in America have grown from 40% of jobs in 2002 to 48% of jobs in 2016.  Pichai says that these required digital skills are much simpler to learn than to code. Programs like &quot;Grow with Google&quot; incorporate digital skills training for job seekers, empowering them to face a world that is technologically oriented. And moreover, learning digital skills has resulted in boosting the confidence of trainees, preventing their alienation in any sense.<br/><br/>## Google on Misinformation and Offensive Content Aimed at Kids<br/><br/>It is natural for tech organizations like Google to ban pornography and graphic violence from online networking stages, however its inability to curb propagation of misinformation and disturbing content aimed at kids has been saddening.  _&quot;There are areas where society clearly agrees what is O.K. and not O.K., and then there are areas where it is hard as a society to draw the line&quot;_, says Pichai, pointing towards the obscurity of content. Google has even hired new moderators in the wake of the criticisms received for allowing child abuse videos, hate speeches, and alarming content to flourish on YouTube.## Sexual Harassment and Gender Equality at Google<br/><br/>Recently, about 20,000 Google employees participated in a protest against sexual harassment, demanding amendments on how Google handles sexual harassment. The dissent was incited after the revelation that a senior executive, Andy Rubin, was given an exit package worth $90 million even after serious allegations against him for sexual misconduct. _&quot;People are walking out because they want us to improve and they want us to show we can do better&quot;_, acknowledges Pichai. Post this walkout, the organisation has been running differently and considerable measures are taken to fight out this tension. For instance, channels are set up where individuals can report such issues freely. _&quot;These processes are much harder on the people going through it than we had realized&quot;_, adds Sundar Pichai.<br/><br/>In August 2017, Pichai drew publicity for firing a Google employee who wrote a ten-page manifesto criticizing the company&#39;s diversity policies and arguing that _&quot;distribution of preferences and abilities of men and women differ in part due to biological causes and ... these differences may explain why we don&#39;t see equal representation of women in tech and leadership&quot;_. While noting that the manifesto raised a number of issues that are open to debate, Pichai said in a memo to Google employees that _&quot;to suggest a group of our colleagues have traits that make them less biologically suited to that work is offensive and not OK&quot;._<br/><br/>That&#39;s all for the tale of Sundar Pichai.<br/><br/>Hope your ambit of looking at technology and leadership could evolve with it!
