Spoonshot: Feeding AI to Food

"Everyone has their own preferences, especially when it comes to food. The only possible way a review and rating makes sense only if it has been reviewed by people who have same food tastes as you, and are not complete strangers to your food preferences! Personalised recommendations based upon your taste preferences, mood and context, are a far better way to receive relevant options for you to make an intelligent meal choice. Spoonshot leverages AI for personalised Food recommendations, and , is well, leading the new field of Food Data Science."<br/><br/>India's food delivery space is at its hottest right now. In the ecommerce industry, food delivery is a segment that has attracted billions of dollars from foreign investors in recent years. Mammoth increase in smartphone penetration and internet availability have further helped startups to scale into Tier III and Tier IV towns, the latest addition being Kharagpur- where Swiggy and Zomato overwhelmed IIT Kharagpur students by onboarding all the restaurants/cafes in the city.<br/><br/>Restaurant discovery and food delivery firm Zomato claimed to have hit the 21 million monthly order run rate in India in September 2018 implying that the firm saw its highest weekly order volume during the month touch 700,000 orders each day of the week.<br/><br/>A decade ago, dabbawalas criss-crossed the city by train and bicycle, conveying metal tins with hot home-cooked lunches to hungry office workers. Now the city's lunchbox carriers have been replaced with thousands of young men with scooters and smartphones, guided by the algorithms of India's online food delivery services. Indeed, the Indian Food delivery market has come a long way!<br/><br/>Most of the successful startups in the consumer internet segment like Swiggy, Zomato, Ola, Flipkart, etc have something in common that makes them work seamlessly. All of them have aggregator-based models, with no ownership of supply(food, cabs, etc). But the deeper similarity is their reliance on consumer feedback to rapidly iterate and eliminate the bad quality of supply. For instance-  In mid 2015, numerous startups were coming up with the concept of providing digital presence to restaurants, which included website development, online ordering, social media presence and online food delivery. But Swiggy, among all of them, was successful because it listed all the restaurants in its app, where the users give feedback about the restaurant. Bad/poor actors are rapidly removed, thereby ensuring quality is managed as they scale.<br/><br/>These aggregators "outsource" quality control to customers, through rapid transactions. Although this particular play goes really well when it comes to cab aggregators and online marketplaces, other mechanisms and review systems should come into place to make the online food ordering a delightful experience.<br/><br/>##Dependency on Reviews and Ratings<br/><br/>Most of us choose what and/or where to eat by reading reviews and ratings of restaurants. Think about all the restaurants you have visited or ordered food from over the last few months. How did you choose that restaurant? Probably by reading ratings and reviews. Did the experience live up to what the reviews told you?<br/><br/>Your taste for food is extremely personal. Everyone has their own preferences, based upon their background and experiences. Most of us even have irrational preferences. We're complex and strange beings. What you want to eat is often based upon your food mood.<br/><br/>Reviews and ratings don't help a person in such scenarios.  The only possible way a review and rating makes sense only if it has been reviewed by people who have same food tastes as you, and are not complete strangers to your food preferences! Personalised recommendations based upon your taste preferences, mood and context, are a far better way to receive relevant options for you to make an intelligent meal choice.<br/><br/>This article talks about Spoonshot, a startup co-founded by an IIT Madras alumnus, that leverages food science and machine learning (AI) to understand and predict people's tastes. They are helping the F&B industry with key challenges including recommendations & personalisation, menu & product development and insights & trends.<br/><br/>##AI in Food: Spoonshot<br/><br/>Spoonshot (formerly known as dishq) was founded in 2015 aiming to build a personalized food discovery app for the Indian market. It was launched by Kishan Vasani (chief executive) and an IIT Madras alumnus Sai Sreenivas Kodur (technology head), who both previously worked, respectively, at online food ordering ventures Just Eat and Zomato.<br/><br/>Dishq(a combination of dish and ishq) concentrates towards shifting food while ordering away from ratings and reviews, towards a more visual and emotionally driven decision. The startup further uses food science to extrapolate novel and relevant insights, personalised to every customer. Their methodology is highlighted towards unveiling clouded product innovation opportunities by surfacing early signals for novel and emerging ingredient combinations. To develop and enhance, their analysis gives decision-makers the quantitative confidence they need to motivate them to act faster.<br/><br/>Today, many of us are adventurous eaters, constantly searching for new food experiences. Most of us also make food decisions by prioritizing our health. In this new environment, all restaurants and FMCG companies, whatever their size, have to become as dynamic as possible. Spoonshot provides the freshest analytics to help them stay at the forefront.<br/><br/>The company initially started out with a B2C product that helped people to find the most relevant food for them. While users of their app were able to discover great food for them, they weren't able to order the food directly through the app. So, in the first half of 2017, they made the transition from food discovery app to taste tech provider.<br/><br/>With the help of its major three products v.i.z Genesis, Personalised recommendations and Guest Intelligence, Spoonshot has created an ecosystem that collects data and converts it into actionable insights.<br/><br/>##Genesis: Going beyond consumer insights<br/><br/>Professionals in the food industry are constantly looking to understand their consumers so as to be able to sell their products effectively. Analyzing the behavior of consumers in different demographics is the conventional way of gathering consumer insights. Many companies today make big decisions about new products, and their marketing strategy based on this data. Spoonshot has built a food brain that is able to ingest large amounts of data about consumer behavior at a global level and make sense of it.<br/><br/>This would not be possible without the combination of food knowledge and artificial intelligence. Molecular level data about food with scientifically backed principles allows them to provide accurate insights. <br/><br/>A case study provided on the company's website helps us to understand the entire process in a better manner. Spoonshot came up with a suggestion for a juice manufacturer to leverage the popular seasonal pumpkin spice trend by connecting disparate dots. After mining through a countless number of data points, they came up with the concoction of a 'Papaya Turmeric Pumpkin Spice Smoothie'. Why?<br/><br/>At the molecular level, pumpkin and papaya share about 75% of their aroma compounds, which suggests that they go well together. The same is true for pumpkin and turmeric. The fact that papaya, like many other tropical fruits, has gained popularity among consumers over the last few years makes this a sensible choice.<br/><br/>In the last 7-8 years, the interest in turmeric as an ingredient has almost doubled. Curcumin, the main active in turmeric has many proven anti-inflammatory benefits and because it comes from a natural source, the use of turmeric is only growing. This beverage makes a great choice for consumers who are health conscious but still want to enjoy the flavor of pumpkin spice.<br/><br/>##Personalised recommendations:- Creating a personal menu for everyone<br/><br/>This feature creates a digital platform with personalized recommendations that delight consumers and drive incremental revenue for the restaurants. Spoonshot recently conducted a pilot with HungerBox, a B2B F&B technology platform, where businesses, e.g. Accenture, are given their own food ordering platform for their employees to use.<br/><br/>As a closed platform, they naturally have high user retention. Employees were frequently using HungerBox's platform, often more than once per day. The issue was that employees wanted to try different food to avoid eating the same dish everyday but had no way to intelligently select other food, given they had so many options. Also, employees would often order a single item, e.g. a coffee, meaning that the basket size was small.<br/><br/>Using the Spoonshot Recommendation API, HungerBox integrated personalised recommendations at 2 key points in their core order funnel. The first was a "Recommended Just For You" box at the start of the funnel. This allowed users to select relevant dishes before choosing a restaurant/cafeteria. Effectively this removed a step in the conversion funnel. The second was a "Why Not Add a X" upsell recommendation, where X would be a drink or snack, just before the checkout and payment screen.<br/><br/>##Guest Intelligence:- The real key of consumer loyalty<br/><br/>It's almost impossible to manually track every customer and interact keeping in mind their past experiences. Guest Intelligence makes it possible. It creates a consolidated customer profile based on past interactions that helps the restaurant staff to provide a delightful experience. Real-time tracking of the customer experience during service helps the restaurant to  take proactive actions and prevent bad feedback.<br/><br/>Intelligent engagement with Guest Intelligence smart CRM ensures brands to stay connected with their customers. This helps businesses increase repeat guests, build loyalty and spend low on acquiring new customers. By providing a 'consumer score', Guest Intelligence helps in identifying high-value and regular customers upfront.<br/><br/>##Traction and Growth<br/><br/>The company claims to have more than 100 brands onboard so far, and it recently acquired Hyderabad-headquartered restaurant analytics startup Brisky. Brisky, operated by Bullpup Technologies Pvt. Ltd, advises restaurants on how to target clients and increase guest loyalty based on the data it collects on customers.<br/><br/>Spoonshot is hiring for multiple full-time profiles. Please visit this [link](https://angel.co/spoonshot/jobs) for more details.
