The beginning of our existence: A path breaking discovery

“IIT Kharagpur researchers led by Prof. Pinaki Sar have discovered signs of life in India that dating back to 2.5 billion years in the form of microbial cells. Surprisingly and interestingly, this discovery of sign of life goes back to an era when the Earth's crust was unstable.“<br/><br/>Microbial life that resides within the deep continental subsurface represents one of the largest and most diverse biospheres on this planet. This vast expanse of historical secrets has spilled gold in recent times. A team of researchers from IIT Kharagpur found evidence of life in India dating back at least 2.5 billion years, to the beginning of time known to scientists as “The Great Oxidation Event“ which marked the entry of oxygen in earth's atmosphere, making life as we know it, possible.<br/><br/>The first sign of life have been found in the form of microbial cells in the Deccan, and it took the team four years of hard work. The microbes were found at a depth of three kilometers from the Earth's surface.<br/><br/>The depths of these ancient rocks do not have oxygen, water, organics, or light to support life. Rock cores dug out from the boreholes were investigated and have been studied to prove the existence of microbes. Dr Pinaki Sar explicitly points out to the fact that these microbes must have survived extreme conditions to live and multiply.<br/><br/>## The Search:<br/><br/>The search started in 2014, when ministry asked IIT biotechnologists to join a team of geologists at Koyna in Maharashtra, where a devastating earthquake had occurred in 1964. These geologists were trying to establish the cause of the quake. Since this part of Deccan is made of the oldest igneous rocks, the ministry asked IIT scientists to explore the possibility of life deep inside the rock belly. These are hard, near impermeable rocks where very little water or nutrients had percolated to make life possible.<br/><br/>## The Results:<br/><br/>The subsurface rock samples from the Koyna-Warna region in western India span a substantial geological timescale, varying from ~65 Ma (Deccan flood basalt) to Archaean (basement granitoids) and including a small zone of weathered basement rocks that experienced the first rounds of lava flows during the emplacement of the Deccan traps. Geochemical attributes of the subsurface rock samples suggest distinct partitioning of the three major crustal provinces (BS, TZ and GR) deep underneath the Deccan traps. During last five decades, the Koyna-Warna region has experienced recurrent seismicity attributable to the changing water levels in the Koyna reservoir, potentially causing structural deformation and associated fault and fracture zones in the adjoining regions.The samples from all three zones used in this study portray characteristic geochemical signatures with respect to minerals present, alkalinity, and low organic carbon along with distinct pattern of abundance for oxides. Nevertheless, variations as evident in a few samples could be attributed to geological phenomena. The variations are mostly in terms of relative abundance of oxides, in particular, higher weight percentage of Fe2O3 and lower weight percentage of SiO2 than the standard basalts and granites. Some samples contain metasomatic minerals (like berlinite, dravite, pyrochlore and phlogopite). Presence of these metasomatic minerals indicates secondary alterations and possible movement of fluids through different faults and fractures.<br/><br/>Microbial life within the nearly impermeable, highly oligotrophic basalts and granitic bedrock is presumed to be constrained by prevailing physical and chemical factors. The igneous rocks in the deep subsurface have very low porosity and moderate-to-high temperature and pressure, 25 °C increase per km in basalt and 15 °C increase per km in granite; 26.7 MPa increase in lithostatic pressure per km.Deep subsurface igneous provinces are often devoid of photosynthetically derived organic carbon. Nevertheless, the geogenic carbon, in the form of dissolved inorganic carbon, organic acid, abiogenic CH4, C2--4 hydrocarbons, electron donors (CO2, CH4, H2, reduced -S and -N) and electron acceptors (NO3-, NO2-, SO42-, Fe3+, Mn4+, etc.) can act as essential metabolic resources and facilitate microbial life. From the overall geochemical data, scientists could elucidate the nutritional status of this igneous realm which suggests its potential to support microorganisms that prefer chemolithotrophic lifestyle. The chemolithotrophic/chemolithoautotrophic mode could be linked to heterotrophic metabolism through metabolic products of lithotrophic organisms, thus driving the community's overall function.<br/><br/>These microorganisms mostly bacteria, date back to a time when Earth's crust was still unstable and earthquakes punctuated with volcanoes. Between 2.5 billions and 65 millions years  ago the crust would intermittently cool but would be shaken up again by fresh eruptions. These cool interludes were the time when the first life formed, in the form of microbes, started making appearances. The Deccan traps where the country's oldest rocks are located, were home to these first life forms. Geologists across the world are trying to reveal life antiquities on Earth and discovery by IIT scientists could well be a landmark.<br/><br/>Dr Pinaki Sar adds to this discovery: “They are extremely intelligent bacteria and they could teach us a lesson or two about how carbon and inorganic sources can be used for our survival!“
