Aviation-The sky and beyond: An interview with Dr. Bala Bharadvaj, MD, Boeing India

-Samruddhi Pataskar

“IIT Technology Ambit interviewed Dr. Bala Bharadvaj at Global Entrepreneurship Summit in February, 2019. Dr. Bharadvaj graduated from IIT Madras in Aeronautical Engineering in 1974 and went on to complete his PhD from Georgia Tech in 1979. He currently serves as the MD of Boeing India Engineering and Technology Center in Bangalore. His interviewed was marked with dollops of humour mixed and profound thinking that set us up to understand and enjoy simultaneously.”

> Q: Does Boeing have plans beyond aviation and aerospace?

A.  We plan to go beyond airplanes. We are looking into end-to-end connectivity, like a flying car. We do a lot of innovative things. We want to transcend airport-to-airport transport and venture into home-to-home transport.

> Q: What is Boeing’s five-year plan for India?

A.  We basically plan to expand our engineering footprint in India, including things like IT, research etc. There is another section about providing production services to India. For example, the Indian air force, navy etc. We look to support needs of the government of India. We also support what we have already delivered to India. Airplanes have complex machinery and require a lot of maintenance.

> Q: What are the technologies that can cause disruption in the aerospace industry? Are these technologies being worked on in the IITs or in the company’s R&D?

A. Disruption refers to something like serendipity, the positive side of an accident. It is something we had not expected was coming. Digital industry is disrupted by data analytics, block chain, IoT etc. These foundations can affect many fields from washing machines to aircrafts. The ability to store and harness a lot of data requires sensors. This can cause an impact on aerospace as well. It depends on the intelligence of people using the data as well. For example, maintenance of an airplane. Sensors on airplanes help us monitor signals. We can thus figure out if that part of the craft needs attention, is deteriorating or is alright. These things were not so easy to tackle back in the day. 

In Boeing R&D, we are looking into all of these things. We are part of a global company so are in touch with colleagues in USA, Australia etc that we collaborate with. Coming to places like the IIT’s, universities are very important as there is a lot of fundamental research going on. The more interaction there is between professors of college and people in the industry, the research can be made more relevant. There are faculty members with high levels of expertise in a niche area. They experiment in a particular zone that help us know if we thinking in the right way and so on.

> Q: In your opinion, what can India do to become the global leader of aviation and space exploration? What kind of research will be required for the same?

A.  India can become the global leader. A great example is ISRO. They have extremely reliable and low cost products. They are launching satellites for other countries. It is competing with the rest of the world. Coming to the airplane side, Boeing works with the Tata group. We are making very reliable parts for both Boeing and Airbus. Indian companies have the discipline of setting up these systems of great quality. Airplanes are more complex than even rockets! A great deal of precision goes into the making. One mistake with a rocket wastes it but airplanes are more flexible in that zone. Worldwide, commercial and military airplanes have achieved a lot of reliability. That is India’s challenge. We have smart, conceptually strong people but we need disciplined, decimated effort to do it again and again. Collaborations are done keeping in mind mutual benefit. There must be goals that both parties find to be useful. Too many cooks spoil the broth. Collaborations cannot be forced. There must be mutual respect and give-and-take.

> Q: What were the major technologies that were used in your domain during your tenure?

A. I started more than 30 years ago. Those days, computers were not as powerful. We take for granted the programs we use today. People back then had a lot more intuitive knowledge and understanding of physics. Most of my engineering classes have been useful during my career. The physics stays the same but the dependence of computers has changed. The complexity of the computer technology has advanced a lot. Aerodynamics is a subject very unique to aerospace. It is a fundamental part. We relied a lot more on experiments. It took a lot of time in the lab. My colleagues were doing research in CFT. Today I work a lot more on the computer as the problem space has become bigger. When we develop the shape of an aircraft, we can do it in a much more sophisticated  way. Similarly on the structure side. We had rudimentary tools in the past but today we have advanced tools, some of which were developed in NASA and taken over by private industry to make them better. The intuitive nature of design has been replaced by the computational design of computers. Our dependence has increased but it has allowed us to make more sophisticated  designs. It has allowed us to make aircrafts with much better fuel efficiency, for example. It has saved us some time but not much because since we can do detail analysis, we explore things we couldn’t do before. Air travel has become less expensive over the last 30 years. So have computers. Not necessarily the machinery but the cost of travel has certainly become cheaper.

> Q: Can you mention some problems that are still not solved by technology but have a good scope for working on?

A. There are many ares but it depends on the subject. If you go back to aerodynamics, which is a more mature field, the kind of unsolved problems are really the niche problems. For example, today we use fluid mechanism to disrupt flow to improve aerodynamics of the environment. This is something that doesn’t drastically change flow in normal conditions but in certain conditions, the overall airplane can become more efficient. We talked about the digital technologies which are still evolving. Aerospace is not a science, it is an industry. Our goal is to take people from one place to another. Shouldn’t we have something better than trains? Like helicopters going from one point of a city to another point in a different city. Helicopters are also a part of the aerospace industry though it has slightly different technology. The part which gets attention is people publishing a paper about something unheard of and completely new. Technologists should be solving problems. Generating ideas and experimenting are part of science. Engineers should use these ideas and to me are entrepreneurs by definition. Material science or aerodynamics is not good or bad but it is the passion people have for that subject. They can take the knowledge and create a success story of creating something new. More than technology, we must focus on the value and utilisation of ideas. A patent is nice to have but that by itself is useful only when it is applied but it is not as important as someone without a patent who solves a problems and makes a 100 more people smile.

> Q: HBR and MIT Tech Review are well-established Journalism bodies that use the brand name of their institutions and provide benchmark content to the world, in a similar sense IIT Technology Ambit is a PAN IIT initiative that uses the brand name of IITs and provides benchmark reviews and articles on Technology in the Indian context. Do you believe that ‘Quality Journalism on research and technology’ is crucial? If yes, what suggestions do you have for IIT Technology Ambit on this front?

A.  The many graduates of IIT’s have gone on to do extremely well. This has created a strong brand name for the IIT’s internationally as well. The IIT ‘tag’ has become synonymous with excellence. We should leverage it because there is a tremulously great amount of respect for that ‘tag’. You can use it to highlight some of the things being done in the system of alumni, professors and so on. You can inspire others. I have met IIT alumni working in the Indian government working on policies and so on. This amazes me because they chose to go back through the IAS exams and become part of a different kind of environment. They are making an impact. That kind of information can inspire the larger audience in terms of what the IIT’s have done. In terms of technology, there is no distinction between Indian, Japanese or American technology. Just like science is science, technology is technology. There are some problems that are specific to a country. For example, flowers from the Ganges are being collected to extract perfume. That is a very Indian context. This is where distinctions arise between different countries. What works in Himachal Pradesh may not work in Tamil Nadu. These are things we should think about when we devise technology. You never know, something that you developed for India may help someone in some other country. 
