Emerging areas in Nanotechnology: A conversation with Prof. Venky Venkatesan\
-Suraj Iyyengar\
"IIT Technology Ambit had the pleasure of interviewing Dr Venky Venkatesan, an alumnus of IIT KGP of the 1969 batch. He completed his PhD degree from Bell Laboratories. He currently leads the Singapore Nano Institute at NUS. He talks at lengths about where nanotechnology is headed and how Moore's law might finally get debunked."
=========================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================

On December 29th, 1959. American Physical Society, California Institute of Technology. Richard Feynman famously gave a talk entitled- 'There's plenty of Room at the Bottom'. “Why cannot we write the entire 24 volumes of the Encyclopaedia Britannica on the head of a pin?“<br/><br/>“Let's see what would be involved. The head of a pin is a sixteenth of an inch across. If you magnify it by 25,000 diameters, the area of the head of the pin is then equal to the area of all the pages of the Encyclopaedia Britannica. Thus, all it is necessary to do is to reduce in size all the writing in the Encyclopaedia by 25,000 times. Is this possible? The resolving power of the eye is about 1/120 of an inch -- that is roughly the diameter of one of the little dots on the fine half-tone reproductions in the Encyclopaedia. This, when you demagnify it by 25,000 times, is still 80 angstroms in diameter -- 32 atoms across, in an ordinary metal. In other words, one of those dots still would contain in its area 1,000 atoms. So, each dot can be adjusted in size as required by the photoengraving, and there is no question that there is enough room on the head of a pin to put all the Encyclopaedia Britannica."<br/><br/>The possibility of synthesis via direct manipulation of atoms discussed, laid the seeds for the development of nanotechnology, as we know it today. Over a decade later, in his explorations of ultraprecision machining, Professor Norio Taniguchi coined the term nanotechnology.<br/><br/>Nanotechnology is the manipulation of matter on an atomic, molecular and supramolecular scale. Generally, it is the manipulation of matter with at least one dimension sized from 1-100 nanometer (10-9 m). It is where quantum mechanical effects are important. At such scales, matter can exhibit unusual physical, chemical, and biological properties. These differ from the properties of bulk materials and single atoms or molecules. Properties such as melting point, fluorescence, electrical conductivity, magnetic permeability, and chemical reactivity change as a function of the size of the nanoparticle.<br/><br/>In the 1980s, two major breakthroughs sparked the growth of nanotechnology. First, the invention of the scanning tunnelling microscope in 1981. It provided an unprecedented visualization of individual atoms and bonds, and used to manipulate individual atoms in 1989. The developers, Gerd Benning and Heinrich Rohrer at IBM Zurich Research Laboratory received a Nobel Prize in Physics in 1986. In 1989 Don Eigler of IBM demonstrated this by arranging 35 atoms on a surface made of nickel to spell out IBM.<br/><br/>Second, the discovery of Fullerenes in 1985 by Harry Kroto, Richard Smalley, and Robert Curl. They together won the 1996 Nobel Prize in Chemistry. In 1991, came the discovery of tiny needles of carbon that run anywhere from 1 nm to 100 nm in diameter. These are tubes made of carbon atoms connected in hexagons and pentagons. The discoverer Sumino Iijima, named them carbon nanotubes. Nanotubes come in two types: single-walled nanotubes (SWNTs) and multi-walled nanotubes (MWNTs).<br/><br/>Manufacturing nanostructures with various degrees of quality, speed and cost has two approaches. The 'bottom-up' and the 'top-down' approach.<br/><br/>Bottom-up manufacturing involves the building of structures, atom-by-atom or molecule-by-molecule. There are three categories of approaches- chemical synthesis, self-assembly, and positional assembly.<br/><br/>-    Chemical synthesis is a method of producing molecules or particles, which are used either directly in products in their bulk disordered form, or as the building blocks of more advanced ordered materials.<br/><br/>-    Self-assembly is a technique in which atoms or molecules arrange themselves into ordered nanoscale structures by physical or chemical interactions between the units.<br/><br/>-    In positional assembly, the atoms, molecules or clusters are  manipulated and positioned one-by-one.<br/><br/>Top-down manufacturing involves starting with a larger piece of material and etching, milling or machining a nanostructure from it.  Precision engineering and lithography are techniques used to remove material from it. Electron beam lithography is primarily used to fabricate the masks used for optical lithography. Ion beam techniques aid to repair masks and for specialist device applications.<br/><br/>Fields like nanoelectronics, nanomechanics, nanophotonics and nanoionics provide a scientific foundation of nanotechnology. Here's a list of the types of things nanotechnology is making possible today. Nano is being used:<br/><br/>-    To make strong lightweight equipment ranging from tennis racquets to windmill blades<br/><br/>-    To clean up industrial solvents contaminating groundwater<br/><br/>-    To protect clothing with nanoparticles that shed water or stains<br/><br/>-    As efficient catalysts in chemical manufacturing by saving energy and minimizing waste products.<br/><br/>-    As a coating on countertops that kills bacteria<br/><br/>-    In sunscreens to provide protection from UV rays without producing a residue<br/><br/>-    In wound dressings to rapidly stop bleeding in trauma patients<br/><br/>-    As a film on glass to stop water from beading and dirt from accumulating<br/><br/>-    In paints to prevent corrosion and the growth of mould and provide insulation<br/><br/>-    To make nano-featured integrated circuits. These allow companies to make computers chips that contain billions of transistors<br/><br/>-    In bandages to kill germs<br/><br/>-    For coatings in heavy-duty machinery to make it last longer<br/><br/>-    In plastic food packaging to keep oxygen out so the food spoils at a much slower rate<br/><br/>Prof T. Venky Venkatesan, Director of NUS Nanoscience and Nanotechnology Initiative and alumnus of Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur spoke to IIT Tech Ambit about the future of nanotechnology.<br/><br/>In 1965, Gordon Moore, one of the founders of Intel, observed that the number of transistors was doubling every 24 months and would continue to do so. This is the Moore's Law. For 50 years the chip industry managed to live up to that prediction. The first integrated circuits in 1960 had ~10 transistors. Today the most complex silicon chips have 10 billion. Silicon chips can now hold a billion times more transistors. Moore's Law was an observation about process technology and economics. However, a combination of spiralling cost, technology barriers, power density limits and diminishing returns means Moore's law is dying. The year to year growth in computing power is ending.<br/><br/>Device designers now need to get creative with the 10 billion transistors they have to work with. Companies are going from fabrication technologies to packaging technologies. With new chip architectures coming in like multi-core CPUs, massively parallel CPUs and special purpose silicon for AI/Machine Learning and GPU's like Nvidia, new ways to package the chips and to interconnect memory and even new types of memory are being developed.<br/><br/>"Currently, we are handling these new technologies using CMOS transistor which is inefficient to handle human-like computer", says Venky. "The chess grandmaster's brain uses 20watt of power whereas the supercomputer uses 20terrawatt of power. That gives you the energy scale at which CMOS is operating. Companies like Intel and IBM are developing 'biochips' which perform biological-like functions. They try to emulate what a neuron does in terms of asynchronous processing and other things. The challenge there is to reduce the power consumption and cost."<br/><br/>Progress in computer technology (and the continuation of Moore's law) is becoming increasingly dependent on faster data transfer between and within microchips. "The next field that nanotechnology will influence is communications interface on multiprocessor systems-on-chip (MPSoCs). A very large electromagnetic delay happens in such chips where distances of propagation are very long. Silicon Photonics is expected to be the technology platform to address next-generation optical interconnect solutions. However, in photonics, there is a slight mismatch between the photonic devices and transistors. A laser- about 100 microns- is about a million times bigger than a transistor. Plasmonics is another answer to this problem where you propagate light in the form of surface plasmon and carry information without the electromagnetic delay. Plasmonics will become the next big thing."<br/><br/>Nanomedicine is the application of nanotechnology in medicine. It draws on the natural scale of biological phenomena to produce precise solutions for disease prevention, diagnosis, and treatment. Nanoparticles are being used to encapsulate and even help deliver medication directly to cancer cells and minimize the risk of damage to healthy tissue. This can change the way cancer is treated. It can also dramatically reduce the toxic effects of chemotherapy. Novel materials are engineered to mimic the crystal mineral structure of the human bone or used as a restorative resin for dental applications. Graphene nanoribbons are being studied with the goal of replacing spinal cord injuries. Nanotechnology enabled imaging and diagnostic tools are reducing diagnosis times, providing personalized treatment options and better therapeutic success rates.<br/><br/>Professor Venky owns a company that is working on correlating the content of breath with diseases. "Every human being is made up of many organic molecules. Disease cells release specific molecules which we release through our breath. By measuring the organic content of the breath we can get all the disease information. Cancer, for example, symptomatically shows up at stage 4 with a 5 per cent survival chance. For stage 1 it has an 80 per cent survival chance. Breath diagnostics coupled with molecular pattern studies can get us a point ranking for each disease. Be it cancer or a disease of the heart, it can be immediately diagnosed."<br/><br/>Technological advancements must keep pace with scientific discoveries. To compete in the global economy, one must learn to quickly leverage new technologies. In his tenure at the Forum on Industrial and Applied Physics (FIAP) Venky stresses on entrepreneurship. He believes that "the enrolment of students in a field correlates with the ability of the student to make a decent living out of the education and the degree finally obtained. Most Physics students enter the field with the view of becoming a faculty or an industrial or National Labs researcher and in some rare cases a teacher. We must somehow change this limited view."
