**Printing a 3D India**

_Astha Jakher, 2nd year UG, Humanities &amp; Social Sciences, IIT KGP_

_Indian industry has traditionally been conservative and this would be a prime hurdle on our path towards normalizing the use of 3D Printing in small scale sectors. The use of 3D Printing has already been adopted by major companies like Maruti Suzuki, who use 3D Printing to test their prototypes for design, engineering, and production._ _Agnikul Cosmos, an IIT Madras incubated start-up picked up the wave of popularity of 3D Printing.  If it had its way, space would no longer be impenetrable as common folks could just &#39;print&#39; rocket engines and launch them in outer space. The start-up in fact has a design for a semi-cryogenic rocket with a 20-kilonewton (KN) engine that can potentially hurl satellites weighing up to 100 kg into Earth&#39;s lower orbit!_

It took Rick some 432 attempts with spare parts in his underground laboratory, three catastrophic mistakes and a practical ruination of Morty&#39;s life before he finally came up with his Space Cruiser (a UFO-like flying vehicle). We&#39;re conveniently bypassing other hassles like cutting metal parts and breaking down the combustion chamber repeatedly under keen watch of Beth and Smith.

Rick isn&#39;t alone here.

Space stations and laboratories struggle with rough models for long periods of time and lots of resources are wasted in the process. The difference however is, unlike Rick, they have more people to answer to than Beth and Smith. NASA lost billions of dollars since its establishment on failed architectural issues and missed out parts.

Charles W. Hull realized how he could use stereolithography to make stereotypes of perceived objects before implementing them on machine parts. It was the mid-1980s and the technique was largely an expensive activity that could exceed the machine set-up costs over $100,000. It was only around the mid-2000s when &#39;3D Printing&#39; became a buzzword and the very first Selective Laser Sintering (SLS) machines became commercially viable. In 2006, on-demand manufacturing came into being for industrial parts and that was a boon to fields of engineering and science, whether they realized it or not.

The speculation that follows our ability to print objects in 3D continues unabated though. However, scientists believe that India might not be far from being the first ones to create &#39;3D Printed&#39; infrastructure. Koshy Varghese, a professor in the Department of Civil Engineering at IIT Madras, recently said that the institute is collaborating with several government agencies and industry to disseminate knowledge and establish standards, policies, and processes to bring the new technology to the field. We are on our way to creating a building with elements of the architecture &#39;3D Printed&#39; out. India is in immense need of instant development of toilets and housings for the poor under various government schemes. If the scientists can come up with ways to make 3D Printing cheaper than the actual construction hassle, time lags for these events would substantially reduce. The costs of 3D Printing these elements are presently expensive but according to Professor Varghese, these costs are only bound to decrease, given the work being done in this sector and the priority given to it.

Indian industry has traditionally been conservative and this would be a prime hurdle on our path of normalizing the use of 3D Printing in small scale sectors. It has always been hard for traditional factories and small scale industries to accept new technological advancements. But 3D Printing is happening. It has already been adopted by major companies like Maruti Suzuki which uses 3D Printing to test their prototypes for design, engineering and production. Nevertheless, 3D Printing that can be used on a production scale is still miles away. Scientists are on their way to optimize the production so that we can step ahead of just prototyping and planning.

Agnikul Cosmos, an IIT Madras incubated start-up picked up the wave of popularity of 3D Printing.  Space wouldn&#39;t be impenetrable for common folks if they could just &#39;print&#39; rocket engines and launch them into outer space. The start-up has a design for a semi-cryogenic rocket with a 20-kilonewton (KN) engine that can potentially hurl satellites weighing upto 100 kg into Earth&#39;s lower orbit. In three years, Agnikul hopes to bring down the cost of access to space significantly and looks to capture a slice of the growing market for launching small satellites. It is up against intense competition globally, but CEO and co-founder Srinath Ravichandran says it is worth the challenge. He says, &quot;The key is flexible configuration with quality so we are able to launch on demand. We can build an engine in one or two days. Cost is a big differentiator and we can do this from India.&quot;

Traditionally, ISRO assembles engines by using metals, collecting parts and working on further specifications. There is tremendous wastage of metals and the process of individual assembly takes a long time. Our team had interviewed Propulsion Unit Director, ISRO, for one of our previous editions and he had told us that they plan to increase the frequency of launches. Today, there is a global race by private companies to hurl thousands of small satellites, some as light as 1 kg, called nanosatellites, for applications such as internet access, navigation, and weather monitoring. SpaceWorks, a US satellite researcher, estimates that over 2,600 nano and microsatellites will be launched by 2023. The latest forecast says that nearly 60% of the satellites planned are from private players, as against 40% in the five years to 2016.

Some companies have opened separate units dedicated to making the best out of 3D Printing. Wipro, for instance, has come up with Wipro 3D which worked on ISRO&#39;s GSAT-19 satellite&#39;s components. Most of them use 3D Printing techniques only on plastic and the work on extending the same on metal parts is rapidly developing.

The gatekeepers of full-fledged 3D Printing in India are approachability and affordability. We&#39;ll still be short on efforts if we don&#39;t work towards making the techniques more efficient and cost-effective. We aren&#39;t far from the day when Rick just lets the parts print  for themselves and assemble (4D?) while he lets Morty do his homework.
