**Radiologist&#39;s Jarvis: Computer Vision in Pulmonary Healthcare**

_Shreya Santra, 3rd year UG, Electrical Engineering, IIT KGP_

_At the Department of Electronics and Electrical Communications Engineering at IIT Kharagpur, researchers have utilized Computer Vision and Machine Learning technologies and built up a Lung CAD (Computer Aided Detection) system to analyze abnormality in the functioning and spotting of infected tissues in the lungs, under the guidance of Prof. Sudipta Mukhopadhyay of the ECE department. On the one hand, the research has led to the development of an AI system that processes CT scan images to recognize lung nodules (possibly cancerous lung masses) and test them for the likelihood of the threat. On the other hand, it has led to an AI system that can identify Interstitial Lung Disease (ILD) patterns in chest HRCT pictures._

Lung nodules are described as &quot;spots&quot; that are 3 centimeters (1.5 inches) in diameter or less (lesions larger than 3 cm are referred to as lung masses). Lung nodules are very common, especially in people who have smoked, but not all lung nodules mean [lung cancer](https://www.verywellhealth.com/lung-cancer-4014694); there are many possible causes. Human detection of growths is done by an important biological procedure called biopsy which is a basic procedure that follows restorative examinations by master radiologists. The biopsy is an examination of tissues removed from a living body to discover the presence of a disease, and the process is nearly always invasive.

ILD is a general category that includes many different lung conditions. All ILDs affect the interstitium, a part of the [lungs](https://www.webmd.com/lung/picture-of-the-lungs)&#39; anatomic structure. The interstitium is a lace-like network of tissue that extends throughout both the [lungs](https://www.webmd.com/lung/rm-quiz-lungs-quiz). By medical imaging empowered by the new research in Computer Vision, patterns are segmented in the HRCT images of the interstitium to diagnose cases of ILDs.

In the context of the AI systems developed by Prof. Mukhopadhyay and his team, the first system will work as an AI assistant to help radiologists distinguish between malignant and benign lung nodules. The other system will help recognize interstitial illness patterns in HRCT pictures delineating the lung tissue surface. Computer imaging makes these procedures non-invasive.

For the first AI system - LungCAD - that categorizes lung nodules as benign or malignant, the workflow is as follows. First it identifies the lung nodule, then segments the nodule, and then paves the way for improving the segmentation. Next, the procurement of information for skin nodules takes place from the database and their report is judged for probable malignancy. The nodule in question is analyzed on the basis of these retrieved results. However, it must be kept in mind that Lung CAD is an assistant to the human radiologist and serves primarily as a confirmatory source. Interestingly, Lung CAD has another important application - in the training of new radiologists. The AI system can be trained on the judgment of the expert radiologists, and new radiologists can compare their conclusions with that of the system to understand the reasoning of the established radiologists.

Coming to the second AI system,  the ILD Detector &#39;s workflow goes as follows. First, automatic segmentation of the pathological region within the lung area. This is followed by imparting flexibility to decide the boundary of the same, and then acquiring similar behavioral segments from the database to finally assess the probability of the pathological segment falling in a particular ILD category. The final verdict regarding the suspected disease is proclaimed by doctors on the basis of the spotted ILD pattern and the gathered clinical information.

A suitable test site required for the validation of both the AI systems was provided by AIIMS Delhi, wherein the software passed the test with flying colors. According to researchers, the latest lung nodule detection rate and grouping rate are 86% and 87%, respectively, and the achievement rate for ILD classification 84%. The team of researchers has been progressing in the direction of further upgrades so as to conduct clinical preliminaries on broader samples. Even radiologists from PGIMER Chandigarh have extensively supported the research by providing the required clinical information, including biopsy case reports and the testing the software for a prolonged duration. For fool-proof testing of the decision system, the ILD Detector will go for a clinical trial in three places across India and, if qualified, there are prospects for a market capitalization of the research.

Interestingly, the AI systems are sensitive to the country of the Training Image dataset. For example, the restorative image scan database used for training belongs to the Indian population. In the process of developing the Lung CAD system, it was found that the public databases from the US: LIDC-IDRI and MedGIFT ILD (that were built from the data sourced from University Hospitals of Geneva) gave poor results when tested on Indian population and vice versa! The number of false positive cases observed were significantly high. &quot;The mismatch perceived due to change in the datasets could be because of the racial variations or disparity in terms of interpretation of the cases by the radiologists of different countries,&quot; said Prof. Mukhopadhyay.

The commercial aspects of the two systems, however, look quite different. Lung CADs have been in mainstream medical technology for a long time since 2002. This sector already has established players like Philips and Siemens, who have oligopolized this market completely. As a matter of fact, when Prof. Mukhopadhyay started with the research in this particular field, it was expected that the literature available for the research would be plenty as Lung CADs have existed in the market since 2002. Contrary to this expectation, he could barely find any profound research papers! &quot;The tech giant companies: Philips, Siemens and Insight manufacture these devices worldwide and have been prospering in this business arena for quite some time. It is probable that they even capitalize on the research catering to Lung CADs through their collaboration with universities. It&#39;s quite evident that these tie-ups and the subsequent Non-disclosure Agreements become reasons behind the scarcity of enough accessible research papers catering to the field of Lung CADs,&quot; added Prof. Mukhopadhyay.

On the other hand, the commercialization of the ILD Detector system is very feasible. There hasn&#39;t been much research and equipment development in this area. The novelty of this technology lies in the lack of commercialized products pertaining to this research. Hence this technology will be exclusive for the detection of Interstitial Lung Diseases.

Prof. Mukhopadhyay added as a side note, &quot;With the upcoming instances of malignant growth of pulmonary nodules and other respiratory illnesses in India, the requirement for skilled radiologists tends to increase with time.&quot; The Lung CAD will merely serve as a personal assistant to radiologists, enabling them to cross-check their interpretations with the help of developed software. There is an urgent need for skilled radiologists for revolutionizing the ambit of lung disease diagnosis.

Special thanks to  - Dr. Ashish Kumar Dhara, Shrikant Mehre (Lung CAD, CT Images)
