# INNOVATION: A WALK THROUGH INVENTING YOUR OWN SOLUTION
### *We have an article on inventing and innovation by Samruddhi Pataskar, who recently won a prize at Invention Factory 2019 for a device she invented. She tells you how to  go  about  inventing  your  own  product,  with  reference  to  the  book  ‘Inside  Real  Innovation’ by Fitzgerald, Wankerl and Schramm.*


While  a  lot  is  said  about  engineering  and  jobs  in  emerging  technology,  invention  tends  to  go  unnoticed.  How  many  students  today  are  actually  interested  in  inventing  an  entire  device  all  by  themselves?  When  was  the  last  time  you  had  a  conversation with someone about innovation? With reference  to  Fitzgerald,  Wankerl  and  Schramm’s  informative book, ‘Inside Real Innovation’, the key elements  to  inventing  a  new  product  have  been  described.
## Old is Gold
Do you remember  the  history books in which we learned  about  the  Harappan  civilisation?  They  had one of the best drainage systems in the world, which inspires engineers of even today to build on better  systems  for  water  management.  ‘Old  tech’  should  not  be  directly  discarded  as  ‘outdated’  as  even  the  age-old,  ancient  knowledge  about  engineering  solutions  proves  to  be  beneficial  for  engineers  at  times.  Egypt’s  design  for  pyramids,  shafts, papyrus and so on were the building blocks of several civilisations to follow.
## Technology as an Art
When you study very hard for an exam but don’t do well or when you work tirelessly day and night on a project but fail to see results, it’s natural to feel bogged  down.  Inventors,  scientists  and  so  on  are  no different. Years of research went into fullerene, an allotrope of carbon with the structural formula C-60. For a long time, it was believed that one fine day a practical use can be found for the allotrope. However,  till  then  fullerene  couldn’t  find  its  way  into the engineering world.

Nonetheless,   fullerene   was and   till   date   is   appreciated  as  a  grand  art.  Now  referred  to  as  ‘buckyballs’,   due   to   its   football-like   structure,   fullerene   was   used   in   infrastructural   art   by   architects.  Today,  it  can  finally  be  practically  put  to use in fuel tanks and to block inflammation, all because it wasn’t dismissed as ‘pointless’ when no use was visible but instead appreciated as an art.
## The Crucial Trio for Teamwork: T, M & I
Studies  say  that  the  best  group  size  for  working  on  any  project  is  three  members.  What  must  the  distribution of skills be among the three members? It is easy to guess that one member must be good at  Technology,  another  at  Market  and  the  third  at  Implementation.  But  the  catch  is  that  all  three  members  must  have  somewhat  knowledge  about  each of the three elements. Employing a Technology expert  who  knows  nothing  about  the  Market  and  Implementation with an expert in Implementation who knows nothing about Technology and Market is doomed to failure. While it is not necessary nor possible to be a stalwart of all the three: Technology, Market and Implementation, it does help to be an allrounder who is highly skilled at one of the above but  has  sufficient  knowledge  about  the  other  two  as well.
The  book  also  mentions  that  one  solution  for  universities can be to change the hiring criterion for professors. Instead of demanding excessive research experience,   universities   can   favour   candidates   who have slightly less research experience but are knowledgeable about Market and Implementation as well. This approach can open doors for people to  explore  all  the  three  aspects  of  innovation  and  receive appreciable training in all of them.
## Technology Push VS Market Pull
When  inventing  something,  there  are  often  two  approaches  that  are  commonly  followed.  One  is  to  look  at  the  research  you  have  done,  the  new  content you have discovered or come up with and to  try  to  implement  that  in  a  device  somehow.  This  is  known  as  Technology  Push,  as  you  are  trying to push your newfound technology into the world.  Another  approach  is  where  you  first  look  at the market, study what problems affect people, understand  what  they  need  and  want  and  then  invent  a  product  to  solve  their  problems.  This  is  known  as  Market  Pull,  as  the  market  pulls  you  towards its problems so that you can solve them in an innovative manner.

Back before computers came into the world, people weren’t  even  aware  that  they  needed  a  computer.  They  had  calculators,  calendars  and  so  on  but  to  have all in one, a processing unit that can multiply ginormous  numbers  for  them  in  split  seconds  of  time,  was  unheard  of.  The  market,  that  is,  the  people, had no problem to present to an innovator because   they   weren’t   aware   of   the   problem   themselves.  Similarly,  an  inventor  can  tackle  an  issue which people have become so accustomed to and to which they have adjusted so well that they have forgotten it is a problem.
## Turning the Tables
There  was  a  girl  who  ran  a  restaurant.  It  did  well  but  she  wanted  to  scale  the  sales  even  more  than  before. There were several expensive ways to do it, such as employing better chefs or introducing new dishes that required costlier ingredients. However, she took to a much cheaper and better method.
The  tables  in  her  restaurant  were  arranged  such  that  only  groups  of  four  people  or  couples  could  be   accommodated   at   each.   She   changed   the   pattern  and  set  up  two  or  more  tables  together,  accommodating  larger  groups  of  8–10  people,  right next to the entrance. This immediately caught the  eye  of  large  groups  of  people  passing  by  who  felt it was convenient for them to be seated rather than  going  to  a  restaurant  and  asking  for  tables  to  be  joined  so  that  they  can  have  a  meal.  This  doubtlessly  increased  her  sales,  by  a  simple  and  quick fix.

I love books which dole out a lot of insight despite being concise. ‘Inside Real Innovation’ is one such book, which immensely helped me in my inventory pursuit this summer. Over the course of six weeks, I developed a device, presented a working prototype and won the third prize for it at Invention Factory 2019.  What  helped  me  the  most  was  the  concept  of Technology Push VS Market Pull as I was able to  figure  out  problems  that  people  are  so  used  to  that they don’t even remember it is a problem. The story of the restaurateur also helped as instead of employing  complex  electronics  into  my  device,  I  used mostly mechanics and aesthetic design. I would recommend  the  book  ‘Inside  Real  Innovation’  to  all the budding inventors and innovators out there who wish to change the world in their own big or small ways.