# AI ASSISTANTS' COMPARISON
### *&quot;Rolling the wheel down the cave to talking to things that aren’t alive, the human race has gone a long way to creating a world that’s as intelligent as himself. Creating interfaces that talk to us like our hairdresser or a personal assistant is as giant a leap as we took on the moon. Here is a peek into how many of these friends we have out there and what are they specialized in&quot;*
### 8th May 2018
“Google just  gave  a  stunning  demo  of  Assistant  making an actual phone call”
<br>The world started in amazement as Sundar Pichai talked  to  Google  Duplex  to  fix  a  hairdresser’s  appointment and the later talked so much like your neighbourhood aunty with super casual “hmmmm”s in the conversation.
<br>Siri’s  famous  casual  joke  about  “hide  the  body  under  the  bridge”  and  Alexa  switching  off  your  light bulbs when you’re sleepy has taken the world on  a  new  wave  of  scientific  revolution.  Humans,  being humans, have scuttled their way from wheels to  steam  engines  but  creating  replicas  of  their  own  behaviour  is  stepping  in  a  different  league  altogether. With the rise of these AI assistants, the world  is  stepping  into  a  different  era  where  every  passing day is making human lives more and more comfortable. AI has revolutionized the way problems are approached - climate change, discovering black holes, creating models, weaponry, defence, finding space debris and whatnot. However, AI’s influence on  human  assistants  has  gone  beyond  that-  It  has  changed the way we live, behave and even think of the world around us.
<br>These  fertile  grounds  have  led  to  a  cut-throat  competition  among  the  multi-million  tech  firms,  each with a dedicated AI team willing to go to any extent  to  create  as  much  humane  experience  for  the users as possible.
<br>From asking them to call John to talking about your feelings with them, these are the areas where Siri, Cortana, Google Assistant, and Alexa are different-
## *Does it run on my phone, PC and watch?*
Accessibility  is  a  major  area  over  which  experts  grade and rank the AI assistants. If you can ask her to turn your fan off from your watch without having to  unlock  your  phone  and  can  manage  to  be  5%  lazier, she deserves a bonus point.
<br>Google Assistant: This can be used on all Android, iOS  devices  as  well  as  Chromebooks.  Google  can  connect  to  a  range  of  third  party  Google  AI-enabled speakers.
<br>Cortana:  This  AI  of  Microsoft  comes  standard  on  all  the  Windows  appliances  but  can  also  be  downloaded  on  Android  and  iOS.  Cortana  has  a  limited  number  of  third  party  speaker  models  on  which it is available and it is still not sure if Cortana will be compatible with them anytime soon. After having  announced  it’s  integration  with  Amazon  Alexa, there is a chance for Cortana to rise soon.
<br>Alexa:  Amazon’s  AI  assistant,  Alexa  works  in  perfect  blend  with  a  range  of  Amazon  speakers  and this makes it one of the most widely accessible AI assistants in terms of design. There is an Alexa app as well, but the app is intended primarily as a supplement  to  another  Alexa  device  and  not  as  a  stand-alone AI assistant.
<br>Siri:  Siri  can  be  accessed  on  any  of  the  Apple  devices,     from     laptops,     desktops,     phones,     tablets,  and  smartwatches.  It  works  in  perfect  synchronization with HomePod and Sonos is also on  the  way  of  releasing  high-end  home  speakers,  claims it will roll out a software update in July that will allow users to access Siri (in addition to Alexa and Google Assistant)
## *How intelligent should I be to use intelligent assistants?*
The  time  you  take  to  get  yourself  familiarised  with the AI and its compatibility to adapt to your 
iit Technology Ambit / JUNE 201910individual   custom   needs   play   a   major   role   in   determining if it’s gonna be on your top list.
<br>Google Assistant, Siri and Alexa: Your these friends require virtually no setup time after you sign in and connect to the network. None of these three took more than about 45 seconds for initial access, and that  included  turning  the  device  on  or,  in  Alexa’s  case, plugging it in.
<br>Cortana:  If  someone  wants  to  access  the  voice  features  of  Cortana,  you  must  access  it  on  your  device  and  then  login  –  oh,  and  you  can’t  use  a  work  or  school  email  address  for  the  login.  Once  you  enter  an  acceptable  email  account,  wait  for  a  verification  code  and  enter  the  code,  you  think  you’re  in  business,  but  you’re  not.  Your  phone  number  login  doesn’t  really  work  and  neither  do  non-work and non-school email address.
## *How well do you understand me?*
If  you’re  asking  your  assistant  to  dial  a  number  to  Tom  and  it  chooses  your  mom  on  the  dial,  it  would  definitely  not  be  something  our  ranking  should be okay with. We can distinguish between these  interfaces  by  their  decipheration  of  what  exactly  you  were  telling  it  and  if  it’s  able  to  make  distinctions like ‘for’ and ‘four’.
<br>Google  Assistant  and  Siri:  They’re  probably  on  the top when it comes to recognizing what you’re actually  trying  to  ask  it  to  do.  They’re  both,  however,  not  very  good  at  following  you  during  long one-sided instructions like dictation and you might need to go high volume for your interface to get you?
<br>Alexa: If there’s music playing in the background, there  is  a  high  chance  that  Alexa  won’t  get  what  you’re trying to tell her. She’s also not as good as Siri or Google Assistant in silence.
<br>Cortana:     Microsoft’s     assistant     had     issues     understanding me even with zero noise interference and at a slow pace and was struggling to get basic tasks through like ‘I want to set a reminder’
## *How well can you get my work done?*
Cortana: Cortana isn’t the best performing interface of these, having failed to show the distance between your  location  and  the  airport  or  convert  dollar  to  yen.
<br>Alexa:    Alexa    worked    well    when    answering    basic  questions,  especially  those  that  pertained  to   purchasing   items   on   Amazon   and   setting   reminders.  It  is  n’t  really  good  when  it  comes  to  tasks that require more context and tiny details. It also struggles with follow up questions with a polite “Sorry,  I  don’t  know  that”.  Where  Alexa  is  good  at  doing  parts  of  tasks,  it  has  a  hard  time  getting  through  all  of  it.  It  could,  for  instance,  tell  you  where  the  closest  Applebee’s  was,  but  it  couldn’t  make  a  reservation.  These  things  make  Alexa  a  suitable tool for ordering on Amazon but isn’t the best AI for natural language use.
<br>Google  Assistant  and  Siri:  These  two  are  close  competitors  when  it  comes  to  understanding  you  and  following  through  your  instructions  well.  If  you’d ask the directions to a landmark, both of them will show you clear driving instructions. However if you prompt them both to guide you through public transport  means  to  get  there,  Siri  will  falter.  Siri,  however,  is  particularly  good  at  finding  proximal  destinations  you  need  like  the  restaurants  and  theaters. New to town or need an assistant to make these bookings for you? Siri is your go-to person. However, it might not help you if your instructions are too specific, “Where can I find fries now?”

There  is  a  long  way  to  go  and  the  race  to  create  gadgets  that  are  more  like  us  has  just  began.  The  ‘Her’s  portrayal  of  AI  assistants  you  can  talk  to  about  your  emotions  and  bond  over  as  a  friend  might just be around the next turn of the road.