# AN OVERLY AMBITIOUS SMART CITY PLAN IS A RESULT OF SIDEWALK LAB'S FECUND IMAGINATION
### *Sidewalk Labs, a subsidiary company of Google’s parent company Alphabet,  released its Master Innovation and Development Plan(MIDP) on 24th July which unveils its development proposal for  Toronto’s eastern waterfront. The plan has raised many eyes as it includes proposals like trash picking robots, adaptive traffic lights and park bench monitors.*
This  is  what  we  hear  when  we  ask  Torontians  to  describe their dream city and not dreams of jetpacks and flying cars. What we hear are dreams that are more  basic,  more  human  and  more  fundamental. We hear of a place with safer streets, more fresh air, more  walkable  sidewalks.  A  place  that  welcomes  both  the  creative  class  and  the  working  class  equally.  A  place  which,  in  simple  words,  anyone  who wishes to call it home, can.
<br>After  World  War  II,  Toronto’s  economy  shifted  away  from  manufacturing,  leaving  the  waterfront  neglected   for   a   long   time.   Even   when   the   20th  century  was  coming  to  an  end,  Toronto’s  waterfront  remained  underutilized  when  it  really  needed  critical  infrastructure  for  a  post-industrial  revival.  But  no  single  entity  was  appointed  to  create a cohesive vision for the waterfront’s future. The  early  21ist  century  had  public  leaders  finally  deciding  to  bring  this  long-neglected  waterfront  to  life.  It  began  as  a  part  of  an  Olympic  bid  that  led  to  bidding  committees  strategically  locating  proposed  venues  along  the  waterfront  and  albeit  the   Olympics   never   materialized,   this   helped   them realize the economic potential of this place. This  led  to  all  three  governments  resolving  to  revitalize  the  waterfront.  This  renewed  focus  led  to the formation of Waterfront Toronto-  a public corporation established in 2001 by the Government of Canada, the Province of Ontario, and the City of Toronto.
## *Waterfront Toronto*
Since its inception, Waterfront Toronto has made major  progress  in  the  revitalization  of  the  city’s  waterfront.   It   has   conducted   many   successful   projects since then.
<br>Toronto   is   now   becoming   one   of   the   most   productive  and  popular  cities.  But  as  it  continues  to grow, it is not able to provide the opportunities that  lead  to  this  growth  in  the  first  place.  This  has  resulted  in  a  huge  gap  between  Toronto’s  commitment  to  diversity  and  inclusion  and  the  city’s  capacity  for  inclusive  growth.  The  gap  has  been  the  most  when  it  comes  to  affordability  in  housing.    As  households  move  farther  from  the  working  places,  traffic  congestion  also  increases.  Rapid  transit  infrastructure  has  found  it  hard  to  catch up with the growth. To top it off, there is the urgency of climate change. All these problems have disproportionate  impacts  on  the  most  vulnerable  population in urban communities.
## *Recognizing the need of new type of development*
Considering  the  urban  challenges  that  we  are  facing  like  affordability,  sustainability,  inclusivity,  economic   opportunity,   and   mobility-   Toronto   is  the  best  place  to  drive  the  future  of  urban  development.  In  spring  2017,  Waterfront  Toronto  issued   a   Request   for   Proposals   (RFP)   for   an   Innovation  and  Funding  Partner  that  identified  the  eastern  waterfront  as  a  “unique  opportunity  for  governments,  private  enterprise,  technology  providers,  investors  and  academic  institutions  to  collaborate on these critical challenges and create a  new  global  benchmark  for  sustainable,  inclusive  and  accessible  urban  development.  They  were  searching for a partner who would help in achieving a series of “ambitious high-level objectives” related to sustainability, inclusion, economic development, and financial feasibility.
<br>Analyzing all objectives, Sidewalk Labs, a subsidiary company  of  Google’s  parent  company  Alphabet,  concluded  that  it  could  achieve  all  of  them  and  build  a  more  vibrant,  lively  and  quality  place  that  has  affordable  housing,  cuts  the  emission  of  greenhouse gases to two-third of its current value and provides better transportation options.
<br>The  Sidewalk  Toronto  project  team  solicited  a  wide range of feedback from residents, researchers, community leaders, and government agencies. The unexpected  level  of  response  with  almost  21,000  Torontians having participated, helped them shape a better plan.
## *What does the public have to say?*
A list of themes was identified by the team which included points like “No tech for tech’s sake” and “Be inclusive and make room for all”. To achieve all 
iit Technology Ambit / JUNE 201921of this, MIDP(Master Innovation and Design Plan) proposes  to  transform  a  small  portion  of  eastern  waterfront  to  be  developed  in  20  years-  into  a  77-hectare IDEA(Innovative Design And Economic Acceleration)  district.  IDEA  district  consists  of  2  phases
## Phase 1 of the IDEA District:
Quayside is a 5-hectare neighborhood connecting downtown Toronto and eastern waterfront. Quayside plan involves many urban innovations.
## *"Trash  picking  robots,  adaptive  traffic  lights,  self-driven  cars  and  raincoats  to  shelter sidewalks"*
### Mobility
A   self-financing   light   rail   transit   extension   to   improve  connectivity  and  bring  more  workers  to  the  waterfront.  A  vast  network  of  pedestrian  and  cycling infrastructure like wider sidewalks, heated pavements or bike lanes and accessibility elements would  encourage  walking  and  cycling  and  also  support people using wheelchairs and other assistive devices.  A  freight  “logistics  hub”  would  feature  a  consolidated  shipping  centre  with  underground  delivery, reducing truck traffic on local streets and improving convenience. Another really interesting proposal is the adaptive traffic lights. For instance, you are an elderly person and you are crossing the street,  what  an  adaptive  traffic  light  would  do  is  calculate your speed and hence hold the lights till you have crossed the street safely.
### Public Realm
A system of  streets,  plazas  and  open  spaces  that  would   encourage   people   to   spend   more   time   outdoors,  together.  An  outdoor-comfort  system  (featuring Raincoats to shelter sidewalks; Fanshells to  cover  open  spaces;  and  Lanterns  to  block  the  wind)  could  dramatically  increase  the  amount  of  time it is comfortable outside.
### Building and housing
Quayside  would  be  the  first  neighbourhood  built  entirely  of  “mass  timber”  —  an  emerging  material  every  bit  as  strong  and  fire-resistant  as  concrete  or   steel   but   far   more   sustainable   —including   record-setting buildings of around 30 storeys. An ambitious  below-market  housing  program  would  include  20%  affordable  housing  units  and  20%  middle income housing units.
### Sustainability
A  district  energy  system  called  a  “thermal  grid”  would provide heating, cooling, and domestic hot water by drawing on clean energy sources such as geothermal (underground) energy, building “waste” (or  excess)  heat,  and  wastewater  heat.  A  smart  disposal  chain  would  feature  real-time  feedback  to  improve  waste  sorting  and  “pay-as-you-throw”  chutes  to  reduce  household  and  business  waste.  An  underground  pneumatic  tube  system  would  separate   waste   streams   underground,   reducing   contamination   and   centralizing   trash   hauling.   An  active  stormwater  management  system  would  rely  on  green  infrastructure  to  capture  and  retain  stormwater and on digital sensors to empty storage containers in advance of a storm.
### Social Infrastructure
A   Care   Collective   would   provide   community   space  dedicated  to  enhancing  health  and  well-being  by  co-locating  the  delivery  of  health  care  and community services alongside proactive health programming.  A  Civic  Assembly,  adjacent  to  the  Care  Collective,  would  provide  neighbourhood  access  to  spaces  for  community  programs,  civic  engagement, and cultural events.
### Digital Innovation
A  ubiquitous  connectivity  network  —  powered  by  a  new  Super-PON(Passive  Optical  Network)  technology    that    reaches    faster    speeds    with    less  equipment  —  can  provide  households  and  businesses  with  a  secure  personal  network  across  an  entire  neighbourhood,  indoors  and  outdoors.  Standardized physical mounts connected to power would  dramatically  reduce  the  cost  of  deploying  digital  innovations,  serving  as  a  sort  of  “urban  USB   port.”   Open,   published   standards   would   make  properly  protected  urban  data  accessible  to  the  community  in  real  time  and  make  it  easy  for  third  parties  to  build  new  services  or  competitive  alternatives   to   existing   ones.   A   best-in-class   approach   to   security   and   resiliency   would   be   designed  to  prevent  disruptions,  rapidly  detect  them, and rapidly restore functionality.
## Phase 2 of the IDEA district:
Anchored by the relocation of Google’s Canadian headquarters to Villiers West, the proposed River District would consist of five distinct neighborhoods — together creating a new hub for urban innovation with the potential for global impact.

The IDEA District is said to impact the economy a lot and has predicted nearly seven times the annual GDP contribution by 2040, nearly seven times as many  jobs  by  2040,  three  times  the  cumulative  property  tax  revenue  by  2040  and  nearly  seven  times the annual ongoing tax revenue by 2040.
## *Controversies about possible misuse of data.*
“There  are  definitely  questions  about  whether Sidewalk Labs will try to make money by tracking people’s  daily  interactions,”  says  David  Roberts,  who  studies  cities  at  the  University  of  Toronto.  “What data will be collected, how personal will it be,  how  will  it  be  used,  and  who  will  have  access  to it?” 
<br>Building   on   existing   privacy   laws,   a   proposed   independent Urban Data Trust would oversee the review  and  approval  of  all  digital  innovations  that  propose  to  use  or  collect  urban  data  in  Quayside  —  whether  developed  by  Sidewalk  Labs  or  third  parties. The proposed Urban Data Trust would be tasked  with  establishing  clear  Responsible  Data  Use  Guidelines  that  safeguard  the  public  good  while enabling innovation, including by making de-identified or non-personal data publicly accessible by   default.   A   publicly   transparent   Responsible   Data Use Assessment would ensure that companies or community members wishing to use urban data do  so  in  a  way  that  has  a  beneficial  purpose  and  protects privacy.
## *Is it too good to be true?*
Sidewalk  Labs  clearly  has  some  skepticism  to  overcome.  But  if  it  can  pull  this  highly  ambitious  project  off  then  it  can  act  as  a  model  for  smart  cities  around  the  world.  The  1,500  pages  long  MIDP albeit primarily focuses on Toronto, can act as a new urban toolkit for the digital age and spark the imagination of the cities tackling the challenges of diverse, equitable, and inclusive growth around the world.