# SUPERCONDUCTIVITY: INCEPTION OF NEW BEGINNING
### *Is  this  a    fundamental  shaking  discovery  in  physics?  Has  the  Indian  scientific  community  finally  broken  through?  Superconductivity  has  been  claimed  to  be  a  physical  possibility  by  Indian  scientists  at  IISc.    Although  still  in  contention,  this  discovery  can  change  the  way  physicists  look  at  the  Universe  and  set  course  for  further work on this intriguing area*
Superconductors:  at  some  point  all  dealing  with  science have been across this word in some manner and  have  got  a  slight  picture  as  why  it  is(or  was)  a  distant dream. So what exactly is a superconductor? Superconductors    are    materials    that    conduct    electricity with no resistance, this means that unlike the most familiar conductors such as copper or steel, a  superconductor  can  carry  a  current  indefinitely  without  losing  any  energy.  Superconductors  can  help build very high efficient devices leading to huge energy savings. Till now, scientists have been able to make  materials  superconduct  only  at  temperatures  much  below  zero  degree  C  and  hence  making  practical utility very difficult.

Superconductivity at ambient temperature has been a holy grail in Physics for about a century. But the dream  doesn’t  seem  so  distant  after  a  team  led  by  Prof.  Anshu  Pandey  from  the  Indian  Institute  of  Science (IISc), Bengaluru confirms that their material exhibits  major  properties  of  superconductivity  at  ambient  temperature  and  pressure.  The  material  that  exhibited  superconductivity  is  in  the  form  of   nanosized   films   and   pellets   made   of   silver   nanoparticles embedded in a gold matrix. Although, silver   and   gold   independently   do   not   exhibit   superconductivity, the team examined 125 samples, of  which  10  showed  a  drop  in  resistance  signaling  the  onset  of  superconductivity.  They  attribute  the  unsuccessful results in the remaining 115 samples to oxygen exposure at the time of sample preparation and when the samples were taken for study.

This   breakthrough   has   been   termed   by   many   scientists as one of the greatest work done in Indian research.  “The  material  developed  is  a  tiny  sphere  of gold, placed 10-20 tinier spheres of silver inside it...This material  shows a sharp drop in resistivity.”

The  initial  version  posted  in  the  repository  by  a  two-member team of Prof. Anshu Pandey and Dev Kumar  Thapa  attracted  criticism,  raising  doubts  about  the  data  and  hence  the  study.  The  reason  being, the presence of identical pattern of noise for two  presumably  independent  measurements  of  the  magnetic susceptibility. Noise, by its very virtue, will be  random  and  so  finding  nearly  identical  noise  in  measurements  made  under  different  conditions  is  highly  improbable.  But  the  IISC  team  didn’t  back  down  from  their  claims  and  provided  validation  of  their data.

Interestingly,  the  plots  of  magnetic  susceptibility  versus  temperature  in  the  new  data  still  show  the  repeated  “noise”  in  some  instances.  However,  the  researchers have clarified that the magnitude of the noise  is  well  above  instrumental  resolution.  This  suggests  a  possible  physical  origin  related  to  the  sample  as  opposed  to  instrument  artefacts.Two  of  the most important properties of superconductivity are  diamagnetism  and  zero  resistance.  These  two  were seen in the materials under study. They seem to suggest that the material becomes superconducting below  a  certain  temperature  (286  K  or  13°C).  And  it can go up to 70°C. At 286 K a clear transition is seen from a normal state to a superconducting state. This is more than any of the reported results in past.

The  revised  version  has  provided  the  recipe  for  preparing  the  material,  which  was  not  included  in  the  version  post  in  July  last  year.  The  revised  version also has plenty of data on the calibration of the  setup.  Besides  retesting  superconductivity,  the  authors tested it on another superconducting metal and repeated noise were not observed.

Researchers    critically    evaluating    the    revised    version  have  raised  some  concerns.  Prof.  Pratap  Raychaudhuri  from  the  Superconductivity  Lab  at  Tata  Institute  of  Fundamental  Research  (TIFR)  Mumbai  has  raised  concerns  that  while  the  drop  in  mutual  inductance  is  fairly  sharp,  it  is  at  a  lower  temperature  compared  with  resistance.  In  superconductivity   when   the   resistance   goes   to   zero,  the  diamagnetic  drop  should  coincide  with  resistance drop. Here the resistance drops to zero at 175 K but the diamagnetic drop is at 165 K. This kind of  difference  between  resistance  and  diamagnetic  drop  is  unusual.  Responding  to  which  the  IISC  team  said  that  there  is  long  penetration  depth,  the  depth to which the magnetic field penetrates inside the material and so the change in mutual inductance can be very small.

Although  they  didn’t  have  enough  clarity  about  different  temperature  at  which  diamagnetic  drops  and  resistance  goes  to  zero  but  there  have  been  organic superconductors where such discrepancies have  been  seen  before.  While  some  red  flags  were  raised  regarding  not  sharing  of  samples  with  peers  for evaluation, the team at IISC clarified that their samples  are  extremely  sensitive  to  environment,  samples degrade very rapidly and so measurements have    to    be    made    immediately    after    sample    preparation. New ways have been found to protect the  sample  for  a  long  time  which  enabled  them  to  conduct  experiments  over  a  long  span.  Once  a  protocol  is  developed  for  better  protection  then  they  will  be  engaging  and  collaborating  with  other  groups in India.

So  what  does  this  breakthrough  mean  for  us.  Till  what  level  can  enhancement  in  superconductors  impact   our   lives.   They   can   be   used   to   build   sensitive magnetometers and fast digital circuits due extremely low resistance. Development of powerful superconducting  electromagnets  that  are  used  in    trains and MRI scans. Microwave filters and RF can be manufactured for mobile phones. Manufacturing high sensitive particle detectors and transition edge sensor  and  many  many  more  as  the  whole  field  of  electronics  will  boom  with  this  discovery.  This  might very well be the beginning of revolution of our current  world  of  modern  electronics  as  everything  from the core of materials and conductivity will be enhanced.