# THE FOODTECH BLOOM - SWIGGY AND ZOMATO
### *Zomato or Swiggy? Dilemma of the lustrum for Tier-1 and 2 Indians? The numbers and on-ground comparisons of the Food-tech oligopoly behemoths are explained in detailed analyses. Read to find out the winner of this tough two player game. Due credits to “The Ken”.*
Convenience has been the starking business idea of this  century,  with  thousands  of  companies  looking  to strengthen their roots in the growing markets of online  shopping,  grocers  on  call,  online  search  for  your home’s new maid and of course, the bikes that get you the pizza you desperately needed for the 4 AM  manchester  match.  Exploiting  the  rush  in  any  moderately busy city and the blessings of perpetual fatigue  of  work  life,  food  delivery  companies  have  taken the role of an urban Superman. In the bright robes  and  competitive  speed,  this  Superman    has  an  enemies  more  eternal  and  profitable  than  Lex  Luthor.
<br>If you’re hungry and tired, you’re definitely not alien to the dominant duo of online food retail services- Zomato and Swiggy.
## *For how long has Lex Luthor been in town?*
The Agarwal Lalji was a bustling place in Patna for a very long time. It still is bustling, but more with a rush of orange and red men on bikes waiting for the order to be prepared so that they could be delivered to   whoever’s   watching   that   manchester   match.   Contrary  to  the  crowd  that  came  to  spend  their  evenings savoring the spicy tandoori paneer, people have restored to easier means of getting it delivered to their doorsteps.
<br>Patna  isn’t  the  only  place.  Cities  such  as  Kanpur,  Kota   and   Thrissur   tell   a   similar   story.   Of   the   blitzscaling by Zomato and Swiggy, the two biggest players in India’s food tech space. While Swiggy has expanded its food delivery business to 145 cities (as of 7 May) from a modest 8 cities in October 2017, Zomato is now delivering food in nearly 250 cities, up from 17 cities less than a year ago. As the two food tech  giants  expand,  they’re  finding  happy  hunting  grounds  further  afield  from  India’s  capital  cities.  Kota, for example, with a population of around one million, is one of the fastest emerging cities for both companies. Largely due to its student population.In his declaring the annual report for the year ended March   2019,   Zomato   CEO   Deepinder   Goyal   painted a similar picture: “...70% of our regular users in  Kolhapur  had  never  tried  food  delivery  in  their  life (even over a phone call),” he wrote. Gurugram-based Zomato, which started deliveries in 2015, has always been king in the north.
## *Is this fight easy?*
Well,  not  really.  Foodpanda,  the  poster  star  of  India’s  times  of  experimenting  with  online  food  delivery  wasn’t  exactly  a  success.  It  changed  hands  several times and wasn’t able to generate substantial sustainable  revenue  until  it  was  acquired  by  Ola.According to a 2016 Bloomberg report, more than 400  Indian  food  delivery  apps  started  between  2013 and 2016. Most of these have since shut shop or been acquired by bigger fish.
<br>There’s a very basic reason for this. It takes money to scale up and you don’t have a choice but to scale up  and  take  the  risk  if  you  want  to  get  somewhere  in  this  fight.  The  food  tech  graveyard  is  filled  with  the  corpses  of  companies  that  couldn’t  scale.  It  is,  therefore,  not  possible  to  have  more  than  two  or  three  dominant  players  in  the  space.  In  China,  for  
iit Technology Ambit / MAY 201920example, the $35 billion delivery market is a tug-of-war between Meituan and Alibaba Group Holdings. Even  in  India,  UberEats  and  Foodpanda  aren’t  on  pinnacles of profitability and their recent plans and performance  indicators  do  not  look  like  they  are  willing to expand this into something big and more sustainable anytime soon.
<br>Zomato and Swiggy, however, weathered the storm, emerging stronger and helping grow the food retail service market. India’s online food delivery market, valued  at  Rs  4,558  crore  (~$652  million)  in  2017,  is expected to grow at a compound annual growth rate of ~38.08% from 2018 to 2023, according to research firm Research on Global Markets.
## *'There's a war within and you can feel it'*
With a lot of smaller cities still being a fertile ground for  expansion,  there’s  a  cut  throat  competition  between  these  two  players.  There  was  an  initial  phase where Swiggy dominated the Bengaluru and Mumbai  area  and  Zomato  remaining  the  North  India centric service but that era is no more. With the  mobile  data  and  place  to  place  wifi,  access  to  the net and consecutively these apps is not a luxury anymore.
<br>Swiggy  saw  the  potential  of  going  beyond  the  big  metros, he says, but their plans were fast-tracked by the ad campaign Swiggy ran during the 2018 IPL. The campaign led to strong signals from over 200 cities where consumers downloaded the Swiggy app and tried to place orders. “We had a list of cities and the number of consumers who were already looking for us. So our expansion was completely consumer-driven.  We  knew  our  product  was  affordable  and  it  had  appeal,”  says  Sunder.  Today,  Swiggy  is  present across 24 Indian states, and Sunder says it plans to enter another 60-70 cities soon. Zomato, following  a  different  approach  focuses  more  on  the  population  of  the  region  before  making  their  move. COO Gaurav Gupta says any city which has 100,000-150,000  people  and  50  restaurants  is  a  great ecosystem to start.
## *Whose pouring in the rest of the money?*
In 2018  alone,  Swiggy  raised  $1.31  billion  across  three   rounds   of   fundraising   from   the   likes   of   Naspers  and  DST  Global,  while  Zomato  raised  around  $410  million  over  two  funding  rounds.  What  makes  this  expansion  all  the  more  feasible  is the fact that the unit economics work in smaller 
iit Technology Ambit / MAY 201921cities.  Some  of  the  newer,  smaller  towns  are  even  better for unit economics as they are smaller in size and  the  cost  of  deliveries  is  cheaper.  Apart  from  this,  so  many  restaurants  that  struggled  to  operate  because  of  limited  space  have  gotten  the  ground  and the opportunity of setting up their businesses. TImings  have  become  flexible  because  you  can  always look out for that kid who will need you pizza for his 4AM manchester match.
## *Are there any new weapons in this game?*
If innovation is one, then a resounding yes. Swiggy, for example, rolled out the Launchpad programme earlier  this  year  to  enter  new  markets  through  educational institutions. The programme brings on board students who’ve passed the first year of their courses  as  campus  CEOs.  These  students  help  launch  Swiggy  within  their  respective  campuses.  They target 250 campuses and have always set their foot up on 30+. 
<br>Swiggy   is   also   venturing   into   cloud   kitchens.These  house  several  restaurant  partners,  allowing  restaurants  to  set  up  kitchens  in  neighbourhoods  where  they  wouldn’t  otherwise  operate.  Swiggy  aims to solve food challenges for pretty much every urban consumer out there. And not only has Swiggy nailed the logistics aspect, it’s leveraging it for newer use  cases.  The  company  is  working  on  Swiggy  Stores, a hyperlocal delivery model for which a pilot project is underway in Gurugram. 
<br>Zomato   on   the   other   hand   is   capitalizing   on   ‘Zomato Gold’, it’s subscription based extra benefits like  discounts.  Zomato  has  also  gotten  into  the  business  of  ingridient  suppy  to  different  partner  restraunts.  Calling  this  concepyt,  ‘Hyperpure’,  they  have  already  opened  their  warehouses  in  16  other  cities.  Their  move  indicates  their  desire  to  bring  about substantial changes in the ecosystem of these restraunts  by  venturing  into  all  areas  like  placing  orders, booking tables, loyality programs for eating out and an active attempt to increase the quality of food in all these areas. Swiggy might overpower it’s counterpart  on  the  front  of  logistics  but  Zomato  may have an advantage when it comes to taking lead in the good sector because of it’s different products around food.
## *Expansion goals*
Sustaining the storms of discount wars and increased competition, the food tech market in general and the duo  in  particular  is  bound  to  grow.  The  untapped  potential  of  India’s  smaller  cities  and  the  growing  trend  of  the  urban  life  will  only  call  for  more  help  from the men with bikes and storage boxes. These businesses,  however  have  a  significant  ‘first  mover’  advantage and hence both the companies are quick in  embracing  new  technologies  and  seeing  where  they can expand further.
## *For them there's a bright time ahead...*
But  before  that  comes,  there  are  gaping  holes  on  the  road.  Affordability  and  the  fact  that  not  every  city  has  meaningful  restaurants  which  brings  the  need  of  delivery  partners  to  manage.  Making  the  whole   interface   more   approachable   to   people   unaccustomed   with   english   and   technology   is   another  challenge.  High  cash  burns  and  risk  of  massive losses is also a very pragmatic possibility.However, the food tech sector has always been the battleground  of  firms  that  sustain,  adapt  and  fight.  The manchester match kid who needs pizza at 4AM will watch this fight eagerly.
<br>So will the thousands of restaurants and men in red and  saffron  who  depend  on  this  for  their  revenues  and jobs.