# PERCEIVING THE INVISIBLE STARTUPS TAPPING EM RADIATIONS
### *Today,  if  a  human  being  is  breathing  air  in  any  part  of  the  world,  that  air  around  him will almost definitely be adulterated by electromagnetic (microwave) radiations from some cellular network. Such is the ubiquity of mobile phone networks in our world.  Though  mobile  networks  are  reported  to  have  certain  harmful  effects  on  our health, some people have viewed its potential as a magnificent resource. Here are two startup groups, who’s innovation makes this adulteration seem more like an enrichment.*
## *ClimaCell*
Category: Big Data, Environmental Consulting
<br>Founding Date: 2015
<br>Founders:   Shimon   Elkabetz,   Rei   Goffer,   Itai   Zlotnik
<br>Based: Boston, Massachusetts
<br>Number of Employees: 51-100
<br>IPO Status: Private
<br>Funding Status: $75M in six rounds

Weather   forecasts   are   made   by   collecting   as   much  data  as  possible  about  the  current  state  of  the   atmosphere   (particularly   the   temperature,   humidity,  and  wind)  and  using  an  understanding  of  atmospheric  processes  (through  meteorology)  to  determine  how  the  atmosphere  evolves  in  the  future.
<br>However, the chaotic nature of the atmosphere and incomplete  understanding  of  the  processes  mean  that  forecasts  become  less  accurate  as  the  range  of the forecast increases. Traditional observations made   at   the   surface   of   atmospheric   pressure,   temperature, wind speed, wind direction, humidity, precipitation  are  collected  routinely  from  trained  observers, automatic weather stations or buoys.
<br>You  need  a  lot  of  data  not  just  to  train  your  forecasting   models   but   also   to   generate   more   precise  and  granular  forecasts.  Typically,  this  has  been  the  domain  of  government  agencies,  thanks  to their access to this data and the compute power to  run  the  extremely  complex  models.  Anybody  can now buy compute power in the cloud, though, and  as  the  Boston  and  Tel  Aviv-based  startup  ClimaCell  is  setting  out  to  prove,  there  are  now  also plenty of other ways to get climate data thanks to  a  variety  of  relatively  non-traditional  sensors  that can help generate more precise local weather predictions.
<br>“What  we  did  specifically  in  India  over  the  last  three  years  was  looking  at  what  we  call  weather  of  things  (WoT),  virtual  sensors  -  things  that  are  not supposed to sense the weather but we can use in order to create reliable weather data and so we started  with  cellular  networks”,  says  co-founder  Elkabetz.
<br>In  their  attempt  to  predict  prediction  accurately,  the  company  is  modeling  work  around  WoT  such  that  by  reverse  engineering  to  signal  in  the  air  to  weather  data,  it  can  be  predicted  where  and  in  which part it is raining in India.
<br>And  that’s  where  ClimaCell’s  main  innovation  comes   in.   Instead   of   relying   on   government   sensors,   it’s   using   the   Internet   of   Things   to   gather  more  weather  data  from  far  more  places  than  would  otherwise  be  possible.  This  kind  of  sensing  technology  could  turn  millions  of  existing  connected  devices  —  like  cell  phones,  connected  vehicles,  street  cameras,  airplanes,  and  drones  —  into  virtual  weather  stations.  It’s  easy  enough  to  see  how  this  would  work.  If  a  driver  turns  on  a  windshield  wiper  or  fog  lights,  you  know  it’s  probably  raining  or  foggy.  Often,  these  cars  also  relay temperature data. If a street camera sees rain, it’s raining.
<br>Using  all  this  data,  ClimaCell  is  providing  its  customers,  like  airlines,  ridesharing  companies,  and energy companies, with real-time weather data and  forecasts.  The  company  has  been  scouting  for potential airlines partners in India. In the past, ClimaCell has worked with airlines such as JetBlue, Delta airline among others.
<br>Having   risen   up   to   $68   million   in   Series   B   funding, ClimaCell is focused on products such as HyperCast  weather  software  for  web,  tablet,  and  mobile, and the Microweather API.Using  all  of  this  data  the  company  also  recently  launched flood alerts for about 500 cities that can provide  24  to  48-hour  warnings  ahead  of  major  flood events. To do this, the company combined its weather data with its own hydrological model.
## *Jeeva Wireless*
Category:  Communication  Hardware,  Internet  of  Things, Wireless Communication
<br>Founding Date: 2015
<br>Founders: Vamsi Talla, Aaron Parks, Bryce Kellogg, Shyam Gollakota
<br>Based: SeattleNumber of Employees: 11-50
<br>IPO Status: Private
<br>Funding Status: $7.5M in four rounds

I’m  sure  sometimes  all  of  us  wished  we  could  exhibit  clairvoyance  whenever  we  misplaced  our  keys or our wallet, right when we need them! Well, technology will never fail to bless us with abilities that  seem  supernatural.  And  some  researchers  at  the University of Washington seem to be the new wizards who have made it possible.

Technological interventions like IoT have enabled everyday  objects  to  be  connected  to  the  Internet  such   that   you   can   communicate   with   them.   “Traditional  radio-based  wireless  communication  solutions like Wi-Fi and Bluetooth are expensive, drains  the  battery  life  of  devices  connected  to  it  and are bulky. This needs to be modified for greater penetration of IoT and related technologies,” says co-founder Vamsi Talla.

Developed  during  the  founding  team’s  graduate  study,   their   solution   to   wireless   connectivity   consumes just 1/10,000th the power used up by a conventional Wi-Fi network. It is also significantly cheaper and more compact. But what truly makes it  disruptive  is  that  it  powers  devices  without  batteries  -  using  just  air!  If  you  have  something  electronic, you would need to power it with some source  of  energy.  It  can  be  a  battery,  electricity, fuel, or renewable sources of energy like sun, wind or  water.  Air,  certainly  does  not  figure  in  the  list,  but Jeeva Wireless does just that.
<br>Equipped  with  antennas,  this  chip  reflects  and  absorbs (or backscatters) existing radio waves and TV  signals,  transforming  them  into  both  a  source  of  power  and  a  communication  medium.  Unlike  wireless setups available in the market today, it does not  generate  its  own  signals  and  simply  leverages  existing   ones   -   making   it   ridiculously   power-efficient  in  the  process.  “Two  objects  equipped  with  this  chip  can  interact  with  each  other  by  harvesting ambient TV and cellular transmissions,” says the IIT-Guwahati alumnus.
<br>Jeeva   will   be   developing   an   extremely   cheap   connectivity  solution  using  a  flexible  sticker  form  factor which can easily be integrated into everyday objects,  thus  enabling  the  vision  of  ubiquitous  connectivity. These devices have no batteries, they last indefinitely and require no maintenance at all, potentially enabling smart cities.
<br>“The   opportunities   for   Jeeva’s   technology   are   endless    in    home,    agriculture,    supply    chain    management,   industrial   sensing   and   healthcare   markets,”  says  Talla.  “These  fields,  when  enabled  with  IoT,  can  significantly  improve  productivity,  reduce   wastage,   streamline   processes   and   add   tremendous value,” he adds.

An  indispensable  insight  that  these  two  instances  of innovative technology give us is that at this stage of  our  human  civilization,  when  our  resources  are  depleting  at  an  alarming  rate,  it  is  imperative  to  look  around  carefully  at  what  we  already  have,  that is going to waste, and try to reuse these latent resources to our advantage. Groups like ClimaCell and  Jeeva  Wireless  have  succeeded  in  making  use  of  resources  that  are  already  ubiquitously  present  around  us,  to  bring  about  revolutionary  developments  to  solve  the  problems  people  face  everyday, much more efficiently.