# ARCHITECTURE AND AI
### *An introduction to the upcoming and slightly less explored field of AI in Architecture. Read about the parameters in architecture that can deploy artificial intelligence to create smarter designs while simultaneously decreasing human effort for the same. Some use-cases currently using machine learning are also discussed.*
## *What exactly is Architecture?*
Architecture   is   generally   conceived,   designed,   realised and built -in response to a set of existing conditions.    The    conditions    may    be    purely    functional  or  may  also  be  to  portray  and  express  social, political and economic ideas. Buildings are made  assuming  that  the  set  of  existing  conditions  is less satisfactory and that a new set of conditions is desirable. Hence the act of creating architecture is a problem solving or a design process.
## *Technology in Architecture:*
Among the list of factors that affect this discipline, technology  is  one  of  the  major  ones.  The  fact  that  there  is  technological  solution  at  every  step  of  the  value  chain  has  significantly  transformed  Architecture.   The   act   of   creating   architecture   has  started  using  the  benefits  of  technology  in  its  various  processes  by  utilising  new  construction  techniques   and   by   developing   new   adequate   software   and   eventually   today,   by   introducing   statistical  computing  capabilities  including  Data  Science & AI(Artificial Intelligence).

Dr.  Imdat  As  is  an  architect  with  an  expertise  in  digital  design  who  is  an  assistant  professor  of  architecture and the co-founder of Arcbazar.com, a crowd-sourced design site.
<br>His research on AI and its impact on architectural design and practice is funded by the US Department of  Defense.  His  team,  in  their  initial  experiments  trained a DNN(Deep Neural Network) with home designs with the aim that it could evaluate homes based on particular functions such as performance of living spaces or kitchen/dining related activities. They  manually  scored  the  quality  of  designs  on  a  scale  of  1  to  100,  and  then  asked  the  DNN  to  evaluate  new  designs  on  its  own.  Amazingly,  the  DNN  scores  were  very  close  to  the  scores  that  they  had  originally  given.  Hence  by  feeding  huge  amount of data into systems , researchers can train computers  to  recognise,  understand  and  realise  what  design  is  suitable  for  the  required  set  of  conditions. The system follows an algorithm, or a set of instructions and learns as it goes. The more the data- the better it interprets.

As  an  art,  architecture  is  more  than  satisfying  the  functional  needs  of  the  building.  Basically  the  physical  manifestation  of  architecture  is  to  provide shelter or to accommodate human activity. However  the  arrangement  and  the  ordering  of  forms and spaces also determines how architecture might promote endeavours, ideas and communicate meaning. So even though it is the study of utilising space and creating order, we should not neglect the importance of political, religious, social, economic and  cultural  aspects  of  architecture.  Hence  AI  probably  cannot  do  complete  justice  in  satisfying  all  the  emotional  aspects  and  there  is  definitely  a  
iit Technology Ambit / MAY 20197limit  to  its  diversity  but  it  can  give  an  intellectual  assistance  just  like  the  DNN  evaluated  designs  according to the previously entered data.
## *AI in Architecture - how?*
Before  jumping  directly  into  architectural  AI,  let  us  look  at  how  architecture  has  been  influenced  by  technology  over  the  years.  Started  in  the  early  30’s, “modular construction” introduced a kind of language  and  grammar  to  architecture  leading  to  simple and rational designs. Early 20’s had Gropius introduced the idea of “Baukasten” for the Bauhaus, a typical module to be then aggregated through strict assembly rules. A year later, Le Corbusier offered his  theory  of  the  Modular  Man.  The  Modulor  was  meant  as  a  universal  system  of  proportions.  The ambition was vast: it was devised to reconcile maths,  the  human  form,  architecture  and  beauty  into a single system. Later Buckminster Fuller built the Dymaxion house which brought a more evolved version  of  modular  housing  or  mass  produced  house.  Winslow  Ames  House,  built  by  Professor  Robert W. McLaughlin in 1933 which was the first large scale modular project was considered a major breakthrough.  Even  City  planning  was  influenced  during  the  60’s  when  projects  like  “Plugin  City”  of Archigram developed the possibility of modular cities.   As   the   complexity   of   modular   design   increased, the need of computational facilities also arose. Gehry Technologies, founded by Gehry and Jim Glymph in the 80’s typically used early CAD-CAM software — such as CATIA — from Dassault Systems  to  tackle  complex  geometric  problems.  The  possibility  offered  by  such  software,  coupled  with   the   potential   computational   power   fast-paced  evolution,  jumped  start  a  discussion  within  the  architectural  field.  Soon  after,  Christopher  Alexander,  architect  and  then  professor  at  U.C.  Berkeley started the discussion by laying down the key  principles  for  Computational  Design.  In  his  “Notes on the Synthesis of Form” (1964) and later, in “a Pattern Language” (1968), Alexander theorized why and how computers should be used to address the   question   of   shape   design.   Computational   design  allowed  extreme  control  over  geometry  ,  increasing  the  design’s  reliability.  It  also  eased  collaboration  among  designers  and  enabled  more  design  iterations  than  hand-drafting  could  afford.  But  using  parameters,  problems  like  repetition  and  also  complexity  of  shapes  could  be  solved  if  a  set  of  systematic  rules  were  made.  The  rules  could be encoded in the program, to automate the time-consuming process of manually implementing them. This parametrization of architecture is best exemplified  at  first  by  Zaha  Hadid  Architects’  work.  Her  designs  would  typically  be  the  result  of  rules,  encoded  in  the  program,  allowing  for  unprecedented levels of control over the buildings’ 
iit Technology Ambit / MAY 20198geometry.  Other  than  its  technical  shortcomings,  parametric  design  fell  short  on  fulfilling  another  aspect  too.  Architecture,  yes,  could  be  the  result  of a fixed number of parameters that the architect could simply encode. But what we forget and tend to  neglect  is  that  both  countless  parameters  and  socio-cultural  factors  only  together  result  to  an  urban equilibrium. This reality, combining adjacent disciplines in a systematic way, can today finally be addressed,  as  our  profession  encounters  Artificial  Intelligence.
## *AI in Architecture*
Few theorists had early on predicted the potential role   of   Artificial   Intelligence   in   architecture.   When  URBAN  II  was  released  by  Negroponte  and   his   group,   the   whole   fascination   over   a   “machine  assistant”  had  already  started.  URBAN  V,  a  later  version,  would  assist  the  designer,  by  adapting  rooms  layout–  defined  as  blocks  —  to  optimize  adjacencies  and  light  condition  as  the  user  draws  onto  a  modular  grid.  In  fact,  URBAN  V distinguished two layers of information: implicit and  explicit.  The  implicit  dimension  is  the  one  handled  and  deduced  by  the  machine,  while  the  explicit one is the dimension set by the user. This duality  of  information  in  URBAN  V  is  the  direct  translation of the machine-human complementarity wished  by  Negroponte.  And  it  is  within  the  set  of  implicit  parameters,  that  the  “intelligence”  —  in  other  words,  the  AI-  built  within  the  machine  would find its expression. Corrections proposed by the  computer,  by  tuning  the  implicit  parameters,  would  be  surfaced  to  the  users  as  suggestions.  To  an  ill-placed  set  of  rooms,  URBAN  V  would  notify the user: “TED, MANY CONFLICTS ARE OCCURRING”.

The three main interwoven schools, which is our first key to understand the cross thinking between Artificial Intelligence and architectural design, are 1.Symbolism, 2.Connectionism and 3.Behaviorism.Symbolism is brought in by descriptive grammar (set of rules about language based on how it is actually used) which  is  divided  into  3  types  according  to  different  users.  The  grammar  which  involves  generating  and  optimizing  conceptual  schemes  is  the most widely applied grammar due to its graphic generation  and  algorithm  enhancement  function.
<br>In  2006,  Mathieu  L.  proposed  ‘wall  grammar’  based on graphic grammar. He pre-defined several styles  of  windowing  rules  and  applied  a  certain  method  (Procedural  Modeling)  to  automatically  generate architecture façade, roof and windowing layout   plans.   In   2015,   Ligler   H.   in   Georgia   Institute  of  Technology  set  3D  graphic  rules  for  architectural  master  John  Portman’s  Entelechy  I  and automatically generated a design with similar styles based on Shape Grammar.
## *A Crowd sourced design site:*
Dr Imdat As co-founded Arcbazar.com , an online competition   platform   ,   which   crowd-sources   design challenges from all over the world. So far it has hosted thousands of design competitions. The majority  is  for  residential  projects  and  the  rest  is  divided among interior , landscape and commercial design  projects.  In  2017,  they  (Raytheon  and  the  University  of  Hartford)  received  a  grant  from  DARPA, the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency of the US Department of Defense, through its   Disruptioneering   program,   and   they   used   Arcbazar’s design data to study the potentials of AI in design. As part of their research they developed a function-driven “deep-learning” system, a popular form of machine learning, to explore the potential of generating conceptual designs with AI.
## Final words:
AI sure does show a lot of potential for architecture which  is  promising  ,  but  it  all  depends  on  the  designer’s ability to communicate and convey the exact motive. It remains true, at the present level of its development, that AI cannot exactly capture the architect’s intuition and sensibility. It is merely a  tool  and  since  benefitting  from  an  intelligent  assistant is within our reach, it should be carefully studied,  tested  and  experienced.  Moreover,  AI  is  simply not the mere result of a sudden disruption. It is the culminating point of 70 years of inventions &  innovations.  As  AI  can  balance  efficiency  and  organicity  while  providing  tremendous  varieties  of   relevant   design   options,   we   see   in   it   the   possibility  for  rich  results,  that  will  complement  our practice and address some blind spots of our discipline.  Far  from  thinking  about  AI  as  a  new  dogma  in  Architecture,  we  conceive  this  field  as  a  new  challenge,  full  of  potential,  and  promises.  Artificial Intelligence is an extended area of human intelligence  and  hence  seamless  integration  of  AI  with human creativity shall be a natural possibility.